OF BENEFITS IN GENERAL. It is, perhaps, one of the most pernicious errors of a rash and inconsiderate life, the common ignorance of the world in the matter of exchanging benefits. And this arises from a mistake, partly in the person that we would oblige, and partly in the thing itself. To begin with the latter: “A benefit is a good office, done with intention and judgment;” that is to say, with a due regard to all the circumstances of what, how, why, when, where, to whom, how much, and the like; or otherwise: “It is a voluntary and benevolent action that delights the giver in the comfort it brings to the receiver.” It will be hard to draw this subject, either into method or compass: the one, because of the infinite variety and complication of cases; the other, by reason of the large extent of it: for the whole business (almost) of mankind in society falls under this head; the duties of kings and subjects, husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and servants, natives and strangers, high and low, rich and poor, strong and weak, friends and enemies. The very meditation of it breeds good blood and generous thoughts; and instructs us in honor, humanity, friendship, piety, gratitude, prudence, and justice. In short, the art and skill of conferring benefits is, of all human duties, the most absolutely necessary to the well-being, both of reasonable nature, and of every individual; as the very cement of all communities, and the blessing of particulars. He that does good to another man does good also to himself; not only in the consequence, but in the very act of doing it; for the conscience of well-doing is an ample reward. Of benefits in general, there are several sorts; as necessary, profitable, and delightful. Some things there are, without which we cannot live; others without which we ought not to live; and some, again, without which we will not live. In the first rank are those which deliver us from capital dangers, or apprehensions of death: and the favor is rated according to the hazard; for the greater the extremity, the greater seems the obligation. The next is a case wherein we may indeed live, but we had better die; as in the question of liberty, modesty, and a good conscience. In the third place, follow those things which custom, use, affinity, and acquaintance, have made dear to us; as husbands, wives, children, friends, etc., which an honest man will preserve at his utmost peril. Of things profitable there is a large field, as money, honor, etc., to which might be added, matters of superfluity and pleasure. But we shall open a way to the circumstances of a benefit by some previous and more general deliberations upon the thing itself.   SEVERAL SORTS OF BENEFITS. We shall divide benefits into absolute and vulgar; the one appertaining to good life, the other is only matter of commerce. The former are the more excellent, because they can never be made void; whereas all material benefits are tossed back and forward, and change their master. There are some offices that look like benefits, but are only desirable conveniences, as wealth, etc., and these a wicked man may receive from a good, or a good man from an evil. Others, again, that bear the face of injuries, which are only benefits ill taken; as cutting, lancing, burning, under the hand of a surgeon. The greatest benefits of all are those of good education, which we receive from our parents, either in the state of ignorance or perverseness; as, their care and tenderness in our infancy; their discipline in our childhood, to keep us to our duties by fear; and, if fair means will not do, their proceeding afterwards to severity and punishment, without which we should never have come to good. There are matters of great value, many times, that are but of small price; as instructions from a tutor, medicine from a physician, etc. And there are small matters again, which are of great consideration to us: the gift is small, and the consequence great; as a cup of cold water in a time of need may save a man’s life. Some things are of great moment to the giver, others to the receiver: one man gives me a house; another snatches me out when it is falling upon my head; one gives me an estate; another takes me out of the fire, or casts me out a rope when I am sinking. Some good offices we do to friends, others to strangers; but those are the noblest that we do without pre-desert. There is an obligation of bounty, and an obligation of charity; this in case of necessity, and that in point of convenience. Some benefits are common, others are personal; as if a prince (out of pure grace) grant a privilege to a city, the obligation lies upon the community, and only upon every individual as a part of the whole; but if it be done particularly for my sake, then am I singly the debtor for it. The cherishing of strangers is one of the duties of hospitality, and exercises itself in the relief and protection of the distressed. There are benefits of good counsel, reputation, life, fortune, liberty, health, nay, and of superfluity and pleasure. One man obliges me out of his pocket; another gives me matter of ornament and curiosity; a third, consolation. To say nothing of negative benefits; for there are that reckon it an obligation if they do a body no hurt; and place it to account, as if they saved a man, when they do not undo him. To shut up all in one word; as benevolence is the most sociable of all virtues, so it is of the largest extent; for there is not any man, either so great or so little, but he is yet capable of giving and of receiving benefits.  . A SON MAY OBLIGE HIS FATHER, AND A SERVANT HIS MASTER. The question is (in the first place) whether it may not be possible for a father to owe more to a son, in other respects, than the son owes to his father for his being? That many sons are both greater and better than their fathers, there is no question; as there are many other things that derive their beings from others, which yet are far greater than their original. Is not the tree larger than the seed? the river than the fountain? The foundation of all things lies hid, and the superstructure obscures it. If I owe all to my father, because he gives me life, I may owe as much to a physician that saved his life; for if my father had not been cured, I had never been begotten: or, if I stand indebted for all that I am to my beginning, my acknowledgment must run back to the very original of all human beings. My father gave me the benefit of life: which he had never done, if his father had not first given it to him. He gave me life, not knowing to whom; and when I was in a condition neither to feel death nor to fear it. That is the great benefit, to give life to one that knows how to use it, and that is capable of the apprehension of death. It is true, that without a father I could never have had a being; and so, without a nurse, that being had never been improved: but I do not therefore owe my virtue either to my nativity or to her that gave me suck. The generation of me was the last part of the benefit: for to live is common with brutes; but to live well is the main business; and that virtue is all my own, saving what I drew from my education. It does not follow that the first benefit must be the greatest, because without the first the greatest could never have been. The father gives life to the son but once; but if the son save the father’s life often, though he do but his duty, it is yet a greater benefit. And again, the benefit that a man receives is the greater, the more he needs it; but the living has more need of life than he that is not yet born; so that the father receives a greater benefit in the continuance of his life than the son in the beginning of it. What if a son deliver his father from the rack; or, which is more, lay himself down in his place? The giving of him a being was but the office of a father; a simple act, a benefit given at a venture: beside that, he had a participant in it, and a regard to his family. He gave only a single life, and he received a happy one. My mother brought me into the world naked, exposed, and void of reason; but my reputation and my fortune are advanced by my virtue. Scipio (as yet in his minority) rescued his father in a battle with Hannibal, and afterward from the practices and persecution of a powerful faction; covering him with consulary honors, and the spoils of public enemies. He made himself as eminent for his moderation as for his piety and military knowledge: he was the defender and the establisher of his country: he left the empire without a competitor, and made himself as well the ornament of Rome as the security of it: and did not Scipio, in all this, more than requite his father barely for begetting of him? Whether did Anchises more for Æneas, in dandling the child in his arms; or Æneas for his father, when he carried him upon his back through the flames of Troy, and made his name famous to future ages among the founders of the Roman Empire? T. Manlius was the son of a sour and imperious father, who banished him his house as a blockhead, and a scandal to the family. This Manlius, hearing that his father’s life was in question, and a day set for his trial, went to the tribune that was concerned in his cause, and discoursed with him about it: the tribune told him the appointed time, and withal (as an obligation upon the young man) that his cruelty to his son would be part of his accusation. Manlius, upon this, takes the tribune aside, and presenting a poniard to his breast, “Swear,” says he, “that you will let this cause fall, or you shall have this dagger in the heart of you; and now it is at your choice which way you will deliver my father.” The tribune swore and kept his word, and made a fair report of the whole matter to the council. He that makes himself famous by his eloquence, justice, or arms, illustrates his extraction, let it be never so mean; and gives inestimable reputation to his parents. We should never have heard of Sophroniscus, but for his son Socrates; nor for Aristo and Gryllus, if it had not been for Xenophon and Plato. This is not to discountenance the veneration we owe to parents; nor to make children the worse, but the better; and to stir up generous emulations: for, in contests of good offices, both parties are happy; as well the vanquished as those that overcome. It is the only honorable dispute that can arise betwixt a father and son, which of the two shall have the better of the other in the point of benefits. In the question betwixt a master and a servant, we must distinguish betwixt benefits, duties, and actions ministerial. By benefits, we understand those good offices that we receive from strangers, which are voluntary, and may be forborne without blame. Duties are the parts of a son and wife, and incumbent upon kindred and relations. Offices ministerial belong to the part of a servant. Now, since it is the mind, and not the condition of a person, that prints the value upon the benefit, a servant may oblige his master, and so may a subject his sovereign, or a common soldier his general, by doing more than he is expressly bound to do. Some things there are, which the law neither commands nor forbids; and here the servant is free. It would be very hard for a servant to be chastised for doing less than his duty, and not thanked for it when he does more. His body, it is true, is his master’s, but his mind is his own: and there are many commands which a servant ought no more to obey than a master to impose. There is no man so great, but he may both need the help and service, and stand in fear of the power and unkindness, even of the meanest of mortals. One servant kills his master; another saves him, nay, preserves his master’s life, perhaps, with the loss of his own: he exposes himself to torment and death; he stands firm against all threats and batteries: which is not only a benefit in a servant, but much the greater for his being so. When Domitius was besieged in Corfinium, and the place brought to great extremity, he pressed his servant so earnestly to poison him, that at last he was prevailed upon to give him a potion; which, it seems, was an innocent opiate, and Domitius outlived it: Cæsar took the town, and gave Domitius his life, but it was his servant that gave it him first. There was another town besieged, and when it was upon the last pinch, two servants made their escape, and went over to the enemy: upon the Romans entering the town, and in the heat of the soldiers’ fury, these two fellows ran directly home, took their mistress out of her house, and drove her before them, telling every body how barbarously she had used them formerly, and that they would now have their revenge; when they had her without the gates, they kept her close till the danger was over; by which means they gave their mistress her life, and she gave them their freedom. This was not the action of a servile mind, to do so glorious a thing, under an appearance of so great a villainy; for if they had not passed for deserters and parricides, they could not have gained their end. With one instance more (and that a very brave one) I shall conclude this chapter. In the civil wars of Rome, a party coming to search for a person of quality that was proscribed, a servant put on his master’s clothes, and delivered himself up to the soldiers as the master of the house; he was taken into custody, and put to death, without discovering the mistake. What could be more glorious, than for a servant to die for his master, in that age, when there were not many servants that would not betray their masters? So generous a tenderness in a public cruelty; so invincible a faith in a general corruption; what could be more glorious, I say, than so exalted a virtue, as rather to choose death for the reward of his fidelity, than the greatest advantages he might otherwise have had for the violation of it?   IT IS THE INTENTION, NOT THE MATTER, THAT MAKES THE BENEFIT. The good-will of the benefactor is the fountain of all benefits; nay it is the benefit itself, or, at least, the stamp that makes it valuable and current. Some there are, I know, that take the matter for the benefit, and tax the obligation by weight and measure. When anything is given them, they presently cast it up; “What may such a house be worth? such an office? such an estate?” as if that were the benefit which is only the sign and mark of it: for the obligation rests in the mind, not in the matter; and all those advantages which we see, handle, or hold in actual possession by the courtesy of another, are but several modes or ways of explaining and putting the good-will in execution. There needs no great subtlety to prove, that both benefits and injuries receive their value from the intention, when even brutes themselves are able to decide this question. Tread upon a dog by chance, or put him to pain upon the dressing of a wound; the one he passes by as an accident; and the other, in his fashion, he acknowledges as a kindness: but, offer to strike at him, though you do him no hurt at all, he flies yet in the face of you, even for the mischief that you barely meant him.  It is further to be observed, that all benefits are good; and (like the distributions of Providence) made up of wisdom and bounty; whereas the gift itself is neither good nor bad, but may indifferently be applied, either to the one or to the other. The benefit is immortal, the gift perishable: for the benefit itself continues when we have no longer either the use or the matter of it. He that is dead was alive; he that has lost his eyes, did see; and, whatsoever is done, cannot be rendered undone. My friend (for instance) is taken by pirates; I redeem him; and after that he falls into other pirates’ hands; his obligation to me is the same still as if he had preserved his freedom. And so, if I save a man from any misfortune, and he falls into another; if I give him a sum of money, which is afterwards taken away by thieves; it comes to the same case. Fortune may deprive us of the matter of a benefit, but the benefit itself remains inviolable. If the benefit resided in the matter, that which is good for one man would be so for another; whereas many times the very same thing, given to several persons, work contrary effects, even to the difference of life or death; and that which is one body’s cure proves another body’s poison. Beside that, the timing of it alters the value; and a crust of bread, upon a pinch, is a greater present than an imperial crown. What is more familiar than in a battle to shoot at an enemy and kill a friend? or, instead of a friend, to save an enemy? But yet this disappointment, in the event, does not at all operate upon the intention. What if a man cures me of a wen with a stroke that was designed to cut off my head? or, with a malicious blow upon my stomach, breaks an imposthume? or, what if he saves my life with a draught that was prepared to poison me? The providence of the issue does not at all discharge the obliquity of the intent. And the same reason holds good even in religion itself. It is not the incense, or the offering, that is acceptable to God, but the purity and devotion of the worshipper: neither is the bare will, without action, sufficient, that is, where we have the means of acting; for, in that case, it signifies as little to wish well, without well-doing, as to do good without willing it. There must be effect as well as intention, to make me owe a benefit; but, to will against it, does wholly discharge it. In fine, the conscience alone is the judge, both of benefits and injuries. It does not follow now, because the benefit rests in the good-will, that therefore the good-will should be always a benefit; for if it be not accompanied with government and discretion, those offices, which we call benefits, are but the works of passion, or of chance; and many times, the greatest of all injuries. One man does me good by mistake; another ignorantly; a third upon force: but none of these cases do I take to be an obligation; for they were neither directed to me, nor was there any kindness of intention; we do not thank the seas for the advantages we receive by navigation; or the rivers with supplying us with fish and flowing of our grounds; we do not thank the trees either for their fruits or shades, or the winds for a fair gale; and what is the difference betwixt a reasonable creature that does not know and an inanimate that cannot? A good horse saves one man’s life; a good suit of arms another’s; and a man, perhaps, that never intended it, saves a third. Where is the difference now betwixt the obligation of one and of the other? A man falls into a river, and the fright cures him of the ague; we may call this a kind of lucky mischance, but not a remedy. And so it is with the good we receive, either without, or beside, or contrary to intention. It is the mind, and not the event, that distinguishes a benefit from an injury.  THERE MUST BE JUDGMENT IN A BENEFIT, AS WELL AS MATTER AND INTENTION; AND ESPECIALLY IN THE CHOICE OF THE PERSON. As it is the will that designs the benefit, and the matter that conveys it, so it is the judgment that perfects it; which depends upon so many critical niceties, that the least error, either in the person, the matter, the manner, the quality, the quantity, the time, or the place, spoils all. The consideration of the person is a main point: for we are to give by choice, and not by hazard. My inclination bids me oblige one man; I am bound in duty and justice to serve another; here it is a charity, there it is pity; and elsewhere, perhaps, encouragement. There are some that want, to whom I would not give; because, if I did, they would want still. To one man I would barely offer a benefit; but I would press it upon another. To say the truth, we do not employ any more profit than that which we bestow; and it is not to our friends, our acquaintances or countrymen, nor to this or that condition of men, that we are to restrain our bounties; but wheresoever there is a man, there is a place and occasion for a benefit. We give to some that are good already; to others, in hope to make them so: but we must do all with discretion; for we are as well answerable for what we give as for what we receive; nay, the misplacing of a benefit is worse than the not receiving of it; for the one is another man’s fault; but the other is mine. The error of the giver does oft-times excuse the ingratitude of the receiver: for a favor ill-placed is rather a profusion than a benefit. It is the most shameful of losses, an inconsiderate bounty. I will choose a man of integrity, sincere, considerate, grateful, temperate, well-natured, neither covetous nor sordid: and when I have obliged such a man, though not worth a groat in the world, I have gained my end. If we give only to receive, we lose the fairest objects of our charity: the absent, the sick, the captive, and the needy. When we oblige those that can never pay us again in kind, as a stranger upon his last farewell, or a necessitous person upon his death-bed, we make Providence our debtor, and rejoice in the conscience even of a fruitless benefit. So long as we are affected with passions, and distracted with hopes and fears, and (the most unmanly of vices) with our pleasures, we are incompetent judges where to place our bounties: but when death presents itself, and that we come to our last will and testament, we leave our fortunes to the most worthy. He that gives nothing, but in hopes of receiving, must die intestate. It is the honesty of another man’s mind that moves the kindness of mine; and I would sooner oblige a grateful man than an ungrateful: but this shall not hinder me from doing good also to a person that is known to be ungrateful: only with this difference, that I will serve the one in all extremities with my life and fortune, and the other no farther than stands with my convenience. But what shall I do, you will say, to know whether a man will be grateful or not? I will follow probability, and hope the best. He that sows is not sure to reap; nor the seaman to reach his port; nor the soldier to win the field: he that weds is not sure his wife shall be honest, or his children dutiful: but shall we therefore neither sow, sail, bear arms, nor marry? Nay, if I knew a man to be incurably thankless, I would yet be so kind as to put him in his way, or let him light a candle at mine, or draw water at my well; which may stand him perhaps in great stead, and yet not be reckoned as a benefit from me; for I do it carelessly, and not for his sake, but my own; as an office of humanity, without any choice or kindness.   THE MATTER OF OBLIGATIONS, WITH ITS CIRCUMSTANCES. Next to the choice of the person follows that of the matter; wherein a regard must be had to time, place, proportion, quality; and to the very nicks of opportunity and humor. One man values his peace above his honor, another his honor above his safety; and not a few there are that (provided they may save their bodies) never care what becomes of their souls. So that good offices depend much upon construction. Some take themselves to be obliged, when they are not; others will not believe it, when they are; and some again take obligations and injuries, the one for the other. For our better direction, let it be noted, “That a benefit is a common tie betwixt the giver and receiver, with respect to both:” wherefore it must be accommodated to the rules of discretion; for all things have their bounds and measures, and so must liberality among the rest; that it be neither too much for the one nor too little for the other; the excess being every jot as bad as the defect. Alexander bestowed a city upon one of his favorites; who modestly excusing himself, “That it was too much for him to receive.” “Well, but,” says Alexander, “it is not too much for me to give.” A haughty certainly, and an imprudent speech; for that which was not fit for the one to take could not be fit for the other to give. It passes in the world for greatness of mind to be perpetually giving and loading of people with bounties; but it is one thing to know how to give, and another thing not to know how to keep. Give me a heart that is easy and open, but I will have no holes in it; let it be bountiful with judgment, but I will have nothing run out of it I know not how. How much greater was he that refused the city than the other that offered it? Some men throw away their money as if they were angry with it, which is the error commonly of weak minds and large fortunes. No man esteems of anything that comes to him by chance; but when it is governed by reason, it brings credit both to the giver and receiver; whereas those favors are, in some sort, scandalous, that make a man ashamed of his patron. It is a matter of great prudence, for the benefactor to suit the benefit to the condition of the receiver: who must be either his superior, his inferior, or his equal; and that which would be the highest obligation imaginable to the one, would perhaps be as great a mockery and affront to the other; as a plate of broken meat (for the purpose) to a rich man were an indignity, which to a poor man is a charity. The benefits of princes and of great men, are honors, offices, monies, profitable commissions, countenance, and protection: the poor man has nothing to present but good-will, good advice, faith, industry, the service and hazard of his person, an early apple, peradventure, or some other cheap curiosity: equals indeed may correspond in kind; but whatsoever the present be, or to whomsoever we offer it, this general rule must be observed, that we always design the good and satisfaction of the receiver, and never grant anything to his detriment. It is not for a man to say, I was overcome by importunity; for when the fever is off, we detest the man that was prevailed upon to our destruction. I will no more undo a man with his will, than forbear saving him against it. It is a benefit in some cases to grant, and in others to deny; so that we are rather to consider the advantage than the desire of the petitioner. For we may in a passion earnestly beg for (and take it ill to be denied too) that very thing, which, upon second thoughts, we may come to curse, as the occasion of a most pernicious bounty. Never give anything that shall turn to mischief, infamy, or shame. I will consider another man’s want or safety; but so as not to forget my own; unless in the case of a very excellent person, and then I shall not much heed what becomes of myself. There is no giving of water to a man in a fever; or putting a sword into a madman’s hand. He that lends a man money to carry him to a bawdy-house, or a weapon for his revenge, makes himself a partaker of his crime. He that would make an acceptable present, will pitch upon something that is desired, sought for, and hard to be found; that which he sees nowhere else, and which few have; or at least not in that place or season; something that may be always in his eye, and mind him of his benefactor. If it be lasting and durable, so much the better; as plate, rather than money; statues than apparel; for it will serve as a monitor to mind the receiver of the obligation, which the presenter cannot so handsomely do. However, let it not be improper, as arms to a woman, books to a clown, toys to a philosopher: I will not give to any man that which he cannot receive, as if I threw a ball to a man without hands; but I will make a return, though he cannot receive it; for my business is not to oblige him, but to free myself: nor anything that may reproach a man of his vice or infirmity; as false dice to a cheat; spectacles to a man that is blind. Let it not be unseasonable neither; as a furred gown in summer, an umbrella in winter. It enhances the value of the present, if it was never given to him by anybody else, nor by me to any other; for that which we give to everybody is welcome to nobody. The particularity does much, but yet the same thing may receive a different estimate from several persons; for there are ways of marking and recommending it in such a manner, that if the same good office be done to twenty people, every one of them shall reckon himself peculiarly obliged as a cunning whore, if she has a thousand sweethearts, will persuade every one of them she loves him best. But this is rather the artifice of conversation than the virtue of it. The citizens of Megara send ambassadors to Alexander in the height of his glory, to offer him, as a compliment, the freedom of their city. Upon Alexander’s smiling at the proposal, they told him, that it was a present which they had never made but to Hercules and himself. Whereupon Alexander treated them kindly, and accepted of it; not for the presenters’ sake, but because they had joined him with Hercules; now unreasonably soever; for Hercules conquered nothing for himself, but made his business to vindicate and to protect the miserable, without any private interest or design; but this intemperate young man (whose virtue was nothing else but a successful temerity) was trained up from his youth in the trade of violence; the common enemy of mankind, as well of his friends as of his foes, and one that valued himself upon being terrible to all mortals: never considering, that the dullest creatures are as dangerous and as dreadful, as the fiercest; for the poison of a toad, or the tooth of a snake, will do a man’s business, as sure as the paw of a tiger.  . THE MANNER OF OBLIGING. There is not any benefit so glorious in itself, but it may yet be exceedingly sweetened and improved by the manner of conferring it. The virtue, I know, rests in the intent, the profit in the judicious application of the matter; but the beauty and ornament of an obligation lies in the manner of it; and it is then perfect when the dignity of the office is accompanied with all the charms and delicacies of humanity, good-nature, and address; and with dispatch too; for he that puts a man off from time to time, was never right at heart. In the first place, whatsoever we give, let us do it frankly: a kind benefactor makes a man happy as soon as he can, and as much as he can. There should be no delay in a benefit but the modesty of the receiver. If we cannot forsee the request, let us, however, immediately grant it, and by no means suffer the repeating of it. It is so grievous a thing to say, I BEG; the very word puts a man out of countenance; and it is a double kindness to do the thing, and save an honest man the confusion of a blush. It comes too late that comes for the asking: for nothing costs us so dear as that we purchase with our prayers: it is all we give, even for heaven itself; and even there too, where our petitions are at the fairest, we choose rather to present them in secret ejaculations than by word of mouth. That is the lasting and the acceptable benefit that meets the receiver half-way. The rule is, we are to give, as we would receive, cheerfully, quickly, and without hesitation; for there is no grace in a benefit that sticks to the fingers. Nay, if there should be occasion for delay, let us, however, not seem to deliberate; for demurring is next door to denying; and so long as we suspend, so long are we unwilling. It is a court-humor to keep people upon the tenters; their injuries are quick and sudden, but their benefits are slow. Great ministers love to rack men with attendance, and account it an ostentation of their power to hold their suitors in hand, and to have many witnesses of their interest. A benefit should be made acceptable by all possible means, even to the end that the receiver, who is never to forget it, may bear it in his mind with satisfaction. There must be no mixture of sourness, severity, contumely, or reproof, with our obligations; nay, in case there should be any occasion for so much as an admonition, let it be referred to another time. We are a great deal apter to remember injuries than benefits; and it is enough to forgive an obligation that has the nature of an offence. There are some that spoil a good office after it is done and others, in the very instant of doing it. There be so much entreaty and importunity; nay, if we do but suspect a petitioner, we put on a sour face; look another way; pretend haste, company, business; talk of other matters, and keep him off with artificial delays, let his necessities be never so pressing; and when we are put to it at last, it comes so hard from us that it is rather extorted than obtained; and not so properly the giving of a bounty, as the quitting of a man’s hold upon the tug, when another is too strong for him; so that this is but doing one kindness for me, and another for himself: he gives for his own quiet, after he has tormented me with difficulties and delays. The manner of saying or of doing any thing, goes a great way in the value of the thing itself. It was well said of him that called a good office, that was done harshly, and with an ill will, a stony piece of bread; it is necessary for him that is hungry to receive it, but it almost chokes a man in the going down. There must be no pride, arrogance of looks, or tumor of words, in the bestowing of benefits; no insolence of behavior, but a modesty of mind, and a diligent care to catch at occasions and prevent necessities. A pause, an unkind tone, word, look, or action, destroys the grace of a courtesy. It corrupts a bounty, when it is accompanied with state, haughtiness, and elation of mind, in the giving of it. Some have a trick of shifting off a suitor with a point of wit, or a cavil. As in the case of the Cynic that begged a talent of Antigonus: “That is too much,” says he, “for a Cynic to ask;” and when he fell to a penny, “That is too little,” says he, “for a prince to give.” He might have found a way to have compounded this controversy, by giving him a penny as to a Cynic and a talent as from a prince. Whatsoever we bestow, let it be done with a frank and cheerful countenance: a man must not give with his hand, and deny with his looks. He that gives quickly, gives willingly. We are likewise to accompany good deeds with good words, and say, (for the purpose,) “Why should you make such a matter of this? why did not you come to me sooner? why would you make use of any body else? I take it ill that you should bring me a recommendation; pray let there be no more of this, but when you have occasion hereafter, come to me upon your own account.” That is the glorious bounty, when the receiver can say to himself; “What a blessed day has this been to me! never was any thing done so generously, so tenderly, with so good a grace. What is it I would not do to serve this man? A thousand times as much another way could not have given me this satisfaction.” In such a case, let the benefit be never so considerable, the manner of conferring it is yet the noblest part. Where there is harshness of language, countenance, or behavior, a man had better be without it. A flat denial is infinitely before a vexatious delay: as a quick death is a mercy, compared with a lingering torment. But to be put to waitings and intercessions, after a promise is passed, is a cruelty intolerable. It is troublesome to stay long for a benefit, let it be never so great; and he that holds me needlessly in pain, loses two precious things, time, and the proof of friendship. Nay, the very hint of a man’s want comes many times too late. “If I had money,” said Socrates, “I would buy me a cloak.” They that knew he wanted one should have prevented the very intimation of that want. It is not the value of the present, but the benevolence of the mind, that we are to consider. “He gave me but a little, but it was generously and frankly done; it was a little out of a little: he gave it me without asking; he pressed it upon me; he watched the opportunity of doing it, and took it as an obligation upon himself.” On the other side, many benefits are great in show, but little or nothing perhaps in effect, when they come hard, slow, or at unawares. That which is given with pride and ostentation, is rather an ambition than a bounty. Some favors are to be conferred in public, others in private. In public the rewards of great actions; as honors, charges, or whatsoever else gives a man reputation in the world; but the good offices we do for a man in want, distress, or under reproach, these should be known only to those that have the benefit of them. Nay, not to them neither, if we can handsomely conceal it from whence the favor came; for the secrecy, in many cases, is a main part of the benefit. There was a good man that had a friend, who was both poor and sick, and ashamed to own his condition: he privately conveyed a bag of money under his pillow, that he might seem rather to find than receive it. Provided I know that I give it, no matter for his knowing from whence it comes that receives it. Many a man stands in need of help that has not the face to confess it: if the discovery may give offence, let it lie concealed; he that gives to be seen would never relieve a man in the dark. It would be too tedious to run through all the niceties that may occur upon this subject; but, in two words, he must be a wise, a friendly, and a well-bred man, that perfectly acquits himself in the art and duty of obliging: for all his actions must be squared according to the measures of civility, good-nature and discretion.  I. THE DIFFERENCE AND VALUE OF BENEFITS. We have already spoken of benefits in general; the matter and the intention, together with the manner of conferring them. It follows now, in course, to say something of the value of them; which is rated, either by the good they do us, or by the inconvenience they save us, and has no other standard than that of a judicious regard to circumstance and occasion. Suppose I save a man from drowning, the advantage of life is all one to him, from what hand soever it comes, or by what means; but yet there may be a vast difference in the obligation. I may do it with hazard, or with security, with trouble, or with ease; willingly, or by compulsion; upon intercession, or without it: I may have a prospect of vain-glory or profit: I may do it in kindness to another, or an hundred by-ends to myself; and every point does exceedingly vary the case. Two persons may part with the same sum of money, and yet not the same benefit: the one had it of his own, and it was but a little out of a great deal; the other borrowed it, and bestowed upon me that which he wanted for himself. Two boys were sent out to fetch a certain person to their master: the one of them hunts up and down, and comes home again weary, without finding him; the other falls to play with his companions at the wheel of Fortune, sees him by chance passing by, delivers him his errand, and brings him. He that found him by chance deserves to be punished; and he that sought for him, and missed him, to be rewarded for his good-will. In some cases we value the thing, in others the labor and attendance. What can be more precious than good manners, good letters, life, and health? and yet we pay our physicians and tutors only for their service in the professions. If we buy things cheap, it matters not, so long as it is a bargain: it is no obligation from the seller, if nobody else will give him more for it. What would not a man give to be set ashore in a tempest? for a house in a wilderness? a shelter in a storm? a fire, or a bit of meat, when a man is pinched with hunger or cold? a defence against thieves, and a thousand other matters of moment, that cost but little? And yet we know that the skipper has but his freight for our passage; and the carpenters and bricklayers do their work by the day. Those are many times the greatest obligations in truth, which in vulgar opinions are the smallest: as comfort to the sick, poor captives; good counsel, keeping of people from wickedness, etc. Wherefore we should reckon ourselves to owe most for the noblest benefits. If the physician adds care and friendship to the duty of his calling, and the tutor to the common method of his business, I am to esteem them as the nearest of my relations: for to watch with me, to be troubled for me, and to put off all other patients for my sake, is a particular kindness: and so it is in my tutor, if he takes more pains with me than with the rest of my fellows. It is not enough, in this case, to pay the one his fees, and the other his salary; but I am indebted to them over and above for their friendship. The meanest of mechanics, if he does his work with industry and care, it is an usual thing to cast in something by way of reward more than the bare agreement: and shall we deal worse with the preservers of our lives, and the reformers of our manners? He that gives me himself (if he be worth taking) gives the greatest benefit: and this is the present which Æschines, a poor disciple of Socrates, made to his master, and as a matter of great consideration: “Others may have given you much,” says he, “but I am the only man that has left nothing to himself.” “This gift,” says Socrates, “you shall never repent of; for I will take care to return it better than I found it.” So that a brave mind can never want matter for liberality in the meanest condition; for Nature has been so kind to us, that where we have nothing of Fortune’s, we may bestow something of our own. It falls out often, that a benefit is followed with an injury; let which will be foremost, it is with the latter as with one writing upon another; it does in a great measure hide the former, and keep it from appearing, but it does not quite take it away. We may in some cases divide them, and both requite the one, and revenge the other; or otherwise compare them, to know whether I am creditor or debtor. You have obliged me in my servant, but wounded me in my brother; you have saved my son, but have destroyed my father; in this instance, I will allow as much as piety, and justice, and good nature, will bear; but I am not willing to set an injury against a benefit. I would have some respect to the time; the obligation came first; and then, perhaps, the one was designed, the other against his will; under these considerations I would amplify the benefit, and lessen the injury; and extinguish the one with the other; nay, I would pardon the injury even without the benefit, but much more after it. Not that a man can be bound by one benefit to suffer all sorts of injuries; for there are some cases wherein we lie under no obligation for a benefit; because a greater injury absolves it: as, for example, a man helps me out of a law-suit, and afterwards commits a rape upon my daughter; where the following impiety cancels the antecedent obligation. A man lends me a little money, and then sets my house on fire; the debtor is here turned creditor, when the injury outweighs the benefit. Nay, if a man does but so much as repent the good office done, and grow sour and insolent upon it, and upbraid me with it; if he did it only for his own sake, or for any other reason than for mine, I am in some degree, more or less, acquitted of the obligation. I am not at all beholden to him that makes me the instrument of his own advantage. He that does me good for his own sake, I will do him good for mine. Suppose a man makes suit for a place, and cannot obtain it, but upon the ransom of ten slaves out of the galleys. If there be ten, and no more, they owe him nothing for their redemption; but they are indebted to him for the choice, where he might have taken ten others as well as these. Put the case again, that by an act of grace so many prisoners are to be released, their names to be drawn by lot, and mine happens to come out among the rest: one part of my obligation is to him that put me in a capacity of freedom, and the other is to Providence for my being one of that number. The greatest benefits of all have no witnesses, but lie concealed in the conscience.  There is a great difference betwixt a common obligation and a particular; he that lends my country money, obliges me only as a part of the whole. Plato crossed the river, and the ferry-man would take no money of him: he reflected upon it as honor done to himself; and told him, “That Plato was in debt.” But Plato, when he found it to be no more than he did for others, recalled his words, “For,” says he, “Plato will owe nothing in particular for a benefit in common; what I owe with others, I will pay with others.” Some will have it that the necessity of wishing a man well is some abatement to the obligation in the doing of him a good office. But I say, on the contrary, that it is the greater; because the good-will cannot be changed. It is one thing to say, that a man could not but do me this or that civility, because he was forced to do it; and another thing, that he could not quit the good-will of doing it. In the former case, I am a debtor to him that imposeth the force, in the other to himself. The unchangeable good-will is an indispensable obligation: and, to say, that nature cannot go out of her course, does not discharge us of what we owe to Providence. Shall he be said to will, that may change his mind the next moment? and shall we question the will of the Almighty, whose nature admits no change? Must the stars quit their stations, and fall foul one upon another? must the sun stand still in the middle of his course, and heaven and earth drop into confusion? must a devouring fire seize upon the universe; the harmony of the creation be dissolved; and the whole frame of nature swallowed up in a dark abyss; and will nothing less than this serve to convince the world of their audacious and impertinent follies? It is not to say, that these heavenly bodies are not made for us; for in part they are so; and we are the better for their virtues and motions, whether we will or not; though, undoubtedly, the principal cause is the unalterable law of God. Providence is not moved by anything from without; but the Divine will is an everlasting law, an immutable decree; and the impossibility of variation proceeds from God’s purpose of preserving; for he never repents of his first counsels. It is not with our heavenly as with our earthly father. God thought of us and provided for us, before he made us: (for unto him all future events are present.) Man was not the work of chance; his mind carries him above the slight of fortune, and naturally aspires to the contemplation of heaven and divine mysteries. How desperate a frenzy is it now to undervalue, nay, to contemn and to disclaim these divine blessings, without which we are utterly incapable of enjoying any other!   AN HONEST MAN CANNOT BE OUTDONE IN COURTESY. It passes in the world for a generous and magnificent saying, that “it is a shame for a man to be outdone in courtesy;” and it is worth the while to examine, both the truth of it, and the mistake. First, there can be no shame in a virtuous emulation; and, secondly, there can be no victory without crossing the cudgels, and yielding the cause. One man may have the advantage of strength, of means, of fortune; and this will undoubtedly operate upon the events of good purposes, but yet without any diminution to the virtue. The good will may be the same in both, and yet one may have the heels of the other; for it is not in a good office as in a course, where he wins the plate that comes first to the post: and even there also, chance has many times a great hand in the success. Where the contest is about benefits; and that the one has not only a good will, but matter to work upon, and a power to put that good intent in execution; and the other has barely a good-will, without either the means, or the occasion, of a requital; if he does but affectionately wish it, and endeavor it, the latter is no more overcome in courtesy than he is in courage that dies with his sword in his hand, and his face to the enemy, and without shrinking maintains his station: for where fortune is partial, it is enough that the good-will is equal. There are two errors in this proposition: first, to imply that a good man may be overcome; and then to imagine that anything shameful can befall him. The Spartans prohibited all those exercises where the victory was declared by the confession of the contendant. The  Fabii were never said to be conquered, but slain; nor Regulus to be overcome, though he was taken prisoner by the Carthaginians. The mind may stand firm under the greatest malice and iniquity of fortune; and yet the giver and receiver continue upon equal terms: as we reckon it a drawn battle, when two combatants are parted, though the one has lost more blood than the other. He that knows how to owe a courtesy, and heartily wishes that he could requite it, is invincible; so that every man may be as grateful as he pleases. It is your happiness to give, it is my fortune that I can only receive. What advantage now has your chance over my virtue? But there are some men that have philosophized themselves almost out of the sense of human affections; as Diogenes, that walked naked and unconcerned through the middle of Alexander’s treasures, and was, as well in other men’s opinions as in his own, even above Alexander himself, who at that time had the whole world at his feet: for there was more that the one scorned to take than that the other had it in his power to give: and it is a greater generosity for a beggar to refuse money than for a prince to bestow it. This is a remarkable instance of an immovable mind, and there is hardly any contending with it; but a man is never the less valiant for being worsted by an invulnerable enemy; nor the fire one jot the weaker for not consuming an incombustible body; nor a sword ever a whit the worse for not cleaving a rock that is impenetrable; neither is a grateful mind overcome for want of an answerable fortune. No matter for the inequality of the things given and received, so long as, in point of good affection, the two parties stand upon the same level. It is no shame not to overtake a man, if we follow him as fast as we can. That tumor of a man, the vain-glorious Alexander, was used to make his boast, that never any man went beyond him in benefits; and yet he lived to see a poor fellow in a tub, to whom there was nothing that he could give, and from whom there was nothing that he could take away. Nor is it always necessary for a poor man to fly to the sanctuary of an invincible mind to quit scores with the bounties of a plentiful fortune; but it does often fall out, that the returns which he cannot make in kind are more than supplied in dignity and value. Archelaus, a king of Macedon, invited Socrates to his palace: but he excused himself, as unwilling to receive greater benefits than he was able to requite. This perhaps was not pride in Socrates, but craft; for he was afraid of being forced to accept of something which might possibly have been unworthy of him; beside, that he was a man of liberty, and loath to make himself a voluntary slave. The truth of it is, that Archelaus had more need of Socrates than Socrates of Archelaus; for he wanted a man to teach him the art of life and death, and the skill of government, and to read the book of Nature to him, and show him the light at noon-day: he wanted a man that, when the sun was in an eclipse, and he had locked himself up in all the horror and despair imaginable; he wanted a man, I say, to deliver him from his apprehensions, and to expound the prodigy to him, by telling him, that there was no more in it than only that the moon was got betwixt the sun and the earth, and all would be well again presently. Let the world judge now, whether Archelaus’ bounty, or Socrates’ philosophy, would have been the greater present: he does not understand the value of wisdom and friendship that does not know a wise friend to be the noblest of presents. A rarity scarce to be found, not only in a family, but in an age; and nowhere more wanted than where there seems to be the greatest store. The greater a man is, the more need he has of him; and the more difficulty there is both of finding and of knowing him. Nor is it to be said, that “I cannot requite such a benefactor because I am poor, and have it not;” I can give good counsel; a conversation wherein he may take both delight and profit; freedom of discourse, without flattery; kind attention, where he deliberates; and faith inviolable where he trusts; I may bring him to a love and knowledge of truth; deliver him from the errors of his credulity, and teach him to distinguish betwixt friends and parasites.  THE QUESTION DISCUSSED, WHETHER OR NOT A MAN MAY GIVE OR RETURN A BENEFIT TO HIMSELF? There are many cases, wherein a man speaks of himself as of another. As, for example, “I may thank myself for this; I am angry at myself; I hate myself for that.” And this way of speaking has raised a dispute among the Stoics, “whether or not a man may give or return a benefit to himself?” For, say they, if I may hurt myself, I may oblige myself; and that which were a benefit to another body, why is it not so to myself? And why am I not as criminal in being ungrateful to myself as if I were so to another body? And the case is the same in flattery and several other vices; as, on the other side, it is a point of great reputation for a man to command himself. Plato thanked Socrates for what he had learned of him; and why might not Socrates as well thank Plato for that which he had taught him? “That which you want,” says Plato, “borrow it of yourself.” And why may not I as well give to myself as lend? If I may be angry with myself, I may thank myself; and if I chide myself, I may as well commend myself, and do myself good as well as hurt; there is the same reason of contraries: it is a common thing to say, “Such a man hath done himself an injury.” If an injury, why not a benefit? But I say, that no man can be a debtor to himself; for the benefit must naturally precede the acknowledgment; and a debtor can no more be without a creditor than a husband without a wife. Somebody must give, that somebody may receive; and it is neither giving nor receiving, the passing of a thing from one hand to the other. What if a man should be ungrateful in the case? there is nothing lost; for he that gives it has it: and he that gives and he that receives are one and the same person. Now, properly speaking, no man can be said to bestow any thing upon himself, for he obeys his nature, that prompts every man to do himself all the good he can. Shall I call him liberal, that gives to himself; or good-natured, that pardons himself; or pitiful, that is affected with his own misfortunes? That which were bounty, clemency, compassion, to another, to myself is nature. A benefit is a voluntary thing; but to do good to myself is a thing necessary. Was ever any man commended for getting out of a ditch, or for helping himself against thieves? Or what if I should allow, that a man might confer a benefit upon himself; yet he cannot owe it, for he returns it in the same instant that he receives it. No man gives, owes, or makes a return, but to another. How can one man do that to which two parties are requisite in so many respects? Giving and receiving must go backward and forward betwixt two persons. If a man give to himself, he may sell to himself; but to sell is to alienate a thing, and to translate the right of it to another; now, to make a man both the giver and the receiver is to unite two contraries. That is a benefit, which, when it is given, may possibly not be requited; but he that gives to himself, must necessarily receive what he gives; beside, that all benefits are given for the receiver’s sake, but that which a man does for himself, is for the sake of the giver. This is one of those subtleties, which, though hardly worth a man’s while, yet it is not labor absolutely lost neither. There is more of trick and artifice in it than solidity; and yet there is matter of diversion too; enough perhaps to pass away a winter’s evening, and keep a man waking that is heavy-headed.  

We are here to encounter the most outrageous, brutal, dangerous, and intractable of all passions; the most loathsome and unmannerly; nay, the most ridiculous too; and the subduing of this monster will do a great deal toward the establishment of human peace. It is the method of physicians to begin with a description of the disease, before they meddle with the cure: and I know not why this may not do as well in the distempers of the mind as in those of the body. The Stoics will have anger to be a “desire of punishing another for some injury done.” Against which it is objected, that we are many times angry with those that never did hurt us, but possibly may, though the harm be not as yet done. But I say, that they hurt us already in conceit: and the very purpose of it is an injury in thought before it breaks out into act. It is opposed again, that if anger were a desire of punishing, mean people would not be angry with great ones that are out of their reach; for no man can be said to desire any thing which he judges impossible to compass. But I answer to this, That anger is the desire, not the power and faculty of revenge; neither is any man so low, but that the greatest man alive may peradventure lie at his mercy. Aristotle takes anger to be, “a desire of paying sorrow for sorrow;” and of plaguing those that have plagued us. It is argued against both, that beasts are angry; though neither provoked by any injury, nor moved with a desire of any body’s grief or punishment. Nay, though they cause it, they do not design or seek it. Neither is anger (how unreasonable soever in itself) found anywhere but in reasonable creatures. It is true, the beasts have an impulse of rage and fierceness; as they are more affected also than men with some pleasures; but we may as well call them luxurious and ambitious as angry. And yet they are not without certain images of human affections. They have their likings and their loathings; but neither the passions of reasonable nature, nor their virtues, nor their vices. They are moved to fury by some objects; they are quieted by others; they have their terrors and their disappointments, but without reflection: and let them be never so much irritated or affrighted, so soon as ever the occasion is removed they fall to their meat again, and lie down and take their rest. Wisdom and thought are the goods of the mind, whereof brutes are wholly incapable; and we are as unlike them within as we are without: they have an odd kind of fancy, and they have a voice too; but inarticulate and confused, and incapable of those variations which are familiar to us.  Anger is not only a vice, but a vice point-blank against nature, for it divides instead of joining; and in some measure, frustrates the end of Providence in human society. One man was born to help another; anger makes us destroy one another; the one unites, the other separates; the one is beneficial to us, the other mischievous; the one succors even strangers, the other destroys even the most intimate friends; the one ventures all to save another, the other ruins himself to undo another. Nature is bountiful, but anger is pernicious: for it is not fear, but mutual love that binds up mankind. There are some motions that look like anger, which cannot properly be called so; as the passion of the people against the gladiators, when they hang off, and will not make so quick a dispatch as the spectators would have them: there is something in it of the humor of children, that if they get a fall, will never leave bawling until the naughty ground is beaten, and then all is well again. They are angry without any cause or injury; they are deluded by an imitation of strokes, and pacified with counterfeit tears. A false and a childish sorrow is appeased with as false and as childish a revenge. They take it for a contempt, if the gladiators do not immediately cast themselves upon the sword’s point. They look presently about them from one to another, as who should say; “Do but see, my masters, how these rogues abuse us.” To descend to the particular branches and varieties would be unnecessary and endless. There is a stubborn, a vindictive, a quarrelsome, a violent, a froward, a sullen, a morose kind of anger; and then we have this variety in complication too. One goes no further than words; another proceeds immediately to blows, without a word speaking; a third sort breaks out into cursing and reproachful language; and there are that content themselves with chiding and complaining. There is a conciliable anger and there is an implacable; but in what form or degree soever it appears, all anger, without exception, is vicious.   THE RISE OF ANGER. The question will be here, whether anger takes its rise from impulse or judgment; that is, whether it be moved of its own accord, or, as many other things are, from within us, that arise we know not how? The clearing of this point will lead us to greater matters. The first motion of anger is in truth involuntary, and only a kind of menacing preparation towards it. The second deliberates; as who should say, “This injury should not pass without a revenge,” and there it stops. The third is impotent; and, right or wrong, resolves upon vengeance. The first motion is not to be avoided, nor indeed the second, any more than yawning for company; custom and care may lessen it, but reason itself cannot overcome it. The third, as it rises upon consideration, it must fall so too, for that motion which proceeds with judgment may be taken away with judgment. A man thinks himself injured, and hath a mind to be revenged, but for some reason lets it rest. This is not properly anger, but an affection overruled by reason; a kind of proposal disapproved—and what are reason and affection, but only changes of the mind for the better or for the worse? Reason deliberates before it judges; but anger passes sentence without deliberation. Reason only attends the matter in hand; but anger is startled at every accident; it passes the bounds of reason, and carries it away with it. In short, “anger is an agitation of the mind that proceeds to the resolution of a revenge, the mind assenting to it.” There is no doubt but anger is moved by the species of an injury; but whether that motion be voluntary or involuntary is the point in debate; though it seems manifest to me that anger does nothing but where the mind goes along with it, for, first, to take an offence, and then to meditate a revenge, and after that to lay both propositions together, and say to myself, “This injury ought not to have been done; but as the case stands, I must do myself right.” This discourse can never proceed without the concurrence of the will. The first motion indeed is single; but all the rest is deliberation and superstructure—there is something understood and condemned—an indignation conceived and a revenge propounded. This can never be without the agreement of the mind to the matter in deliberation. The end of this question is to know the nature and quality of anger. If it be bred in us it will never yield to reason, for all involuntary motions are inevitable and invincible; as a kind of horror and shrugging upon the sprinkling of cold water; the hair standing on end at ill news; giddiness at the sight of a precipice; blushing at lewd discourse. In these cases reason can do no good, but anger may undoubtedly be overcome by caution and good counsel, for it is a voluntary vice, and not of the condition of those accidents that befall us as frailties of our humanity, amongst which must be reckoned the first motions of the mind after the opinion of an injury received, which it is not in the power of human nature to avoid, and this is it that affects us upon the stage, or in a story. Can any man read the death of Pompey, and not be touched with an indignation? The sound of a trumpet rouses the spirits and provokes courage. It makes a man sad to see the shipwreck even of an enemy; and we are much surprised by fear in other cases—all these motions are not so much affections as preludes to them. The clashing of arms or the beating of a drum excites a war-horse: nay, a song from Xenophantes would make Alexander take his sword in his hand. In all these cases the mind rather suffers than acts, and therefore it is not an affection to be moved, but to give way to that motion, and to follow willingly what was started by chance—these are not affections, but impulses of the body. The bravest man in the world may look pale when he puts on his armor, his knees knock, and his heart work before the battle is joined: but these are only motions; whereas anger is an excursion, and proposes revenge or punishment, which cannot be without the mind. As fear flies, so anger assaults; and it is not possible to resolve, either upon violence or caution, without the concurrence of the will.  . ANGER MAY BE SUPPRESSED. It is an idle thing to pretend that we cannot govern our anger; for some things that we do are much harder than others that we ought to do; the wildest affections may be tamed by discipline, and there is hardly anything which the mind will do but it may do. There needs no more argument in this case than the instances of several persons, both powerful and impatient, that have gotten the absolute mastery of themselves in this point. Thrasippus in his drink fell foul upon the cruelties of Pisistratus; who, when he was urged by several about him to make an example of him, returned this answer, “Why should I be angry with a man that stumbles upon me blindfold?” In effect most of our quarrels are of our own making, either by mistake or by aggravation. Anger comes sometimes upon us, but we go oftener to it, and instead of rejecting it we call it. Augustus was a great master of his passion: for Timagenus, an historian, wrote several bitter things against his person and his family: which passed among the people plausibly enough, as pieces of rash wit commonly do. Cæsar advised him several times to forbear; and when that would not do, forbade him his roof. After this, Asinius Pollio gave him entertainment; and he was so well beloved in the city, that every man’s house was open to him. Those things that he had written in honor of Augustus, he recited and burnt, and publicly professed himself Cæsar’s enemy. Augustus, for all this, never fell out with any man that received him; only once, he told Pollio, that he had taken a snake into his bosom: and as Pollio was about to excuse himself; “No,” says Cæsar, interrupting him, “make your best of him.” And offering to cast him off at that very moment, if Cæsar pleased: “Do you think,” says Cæsar, “that I will ever contribute to the parting of you, that made you friends?” for Pollio was angry with him before, and only entertained him now because Cæsar had discarded him. The moderation of Antigonus was remarkable. Some of his soldiers were railing at him one night, where there was but a hanging betwixt them. Antigonus overheard them, and putting it gently aside; “Soldiers,” says he, “stand a little further off, for fear the king should hear you.” And we are to consider, not only violent examples, but moderate, where there wanted neither cause of displeasure nor power of revenge: as in the case of Antigonus, who the same night hearing his soldiers cursing him for bringing them into so foul a way, he went to them, and without telling them who he was, helped them out of it. “Now,” says he, “you may be allowed to curse him that brought you into the mire, provided you bless him that took you out of it.” It was a notable story that of Vedius Pallio, upon his inviting of Augustus to supper. One of his boys happened to break a glass: and his master, in a rage, commanded him to be thrown in a pond to feed his lampreys. This action of his might be taken for luxury, though, in truth, it was cruelty. The boy was seized, but brake loose and threw himself at Augustus’ feet, only desiring that he might not die that death. Cæsar, in abhorrence of the barbarity, presently ordered all the rest of the glasses to be broken, the boy to be released, and the pond to be filled up, that there might be no further occasion for an inhumanity of that nature. This was an authority well employed. Shall the breaking of a glass cost a man his life? Nothing but a predominant fear could ever have mastered his choleric and sanguinary disposition. This man deserved to die a thousand deaths, either for eating human flesh at second-hand in his lampreys, or for keeping of his fish to be so fed. It is written of Præxaspes (a favorite of Cambyses, who was much given to wine) that he took the freedom to tell this prince of his hard drinking, and to lay before him the scandal and the inconveniences of his excesses; and how that, in those distempers, he had not the command of himself. “Now,” says Cambyses, “to show you your mistake, you shall see me drink deeper than ever I did, and yet keep the use of my eyes, and of my hands, as well as if I were sober.” Upon this he drank to a higher pitch than ordinary, and ordered Præxaspes’ son to go out, and stand on the other side of the threshold, with his left arm over his head; “And,” says he, “if I have a good aim, have at the heart of him.” He shot, and upon cutting up the young man, they found indeed that the arrow had struck him through the middle of the heart. “What do you think now,” says Cambyses, “is my hand steady or not?” “Apollo himself,” says Præxaspes, “could not have outdone it.” It may be a question now, which was the greater impiety, the murder itself, or the commendation of it; for him to take the heart of his son, while it was yet reeking and panting under the wound, for an occasion of flattery: why was there not another experiment made upon the father, to try if Cambyses could not have yet mended his shot? This was a most unmanly violation of hospitality; but the approbation of the act was still worse than the crime itself. This example of Præxaspes proves sufficiently that a man may repress his anger; for he returned not one ill word, no not so much as a complaint; but he paid dear for his good counsel. He had been wiser, perhaps, if he had let the king alone in his cups, for he had better have drunk wine than blood. It is a dangerous office to give good advice to intemperate princes. Another instance of anger suppressed, we have in Harpagus, who was commanded to expose Cyrus upon a mountain. But the child was preserved; which, when Astyages came afterwards to understand, he invited Harpagus to a dish of meat; and when he had eaten his fill, he told him it was a piece of his son, and asked him how he liked the seasoning. “Whatever pleases your Majesty,” says Harpagus, “must please me:” and he made no more words of it. It is most certain, that we might govern our anger if we would; for the same thing that galls us at home gives us no offence at all abroad; and what is the reason of it, but that we are patient in one place, and froward in another? It was a strong provocation that which was given to Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander. The Athenians sent their ambassadors to him, and they were received with this compliment, “Tell me, gentlemen,” says Philip, “what is there that I can do to oblige the Athenians?” Democharas, one of the ambassadors, told him, that they would take it for a great obligation if he would be pleased to hang himself. This insolence gave an indignation to the by-standers; but Philip bade them not to meddle with him, but even to let that foul-mouthed fellow go as he came. “And for you, the rest of the ambassadors,” says he, “pray tell the Athenians, that it is worse to speak such things than to hear and forgive them.” This wonderful patience under contumelies was a great means of Philip’s security.   IT IS A SHORT MADNESS, AND A DEFORMED VICE. He was much in the right, whoever it was, that first called anger a short madness; for they have both of them the same symptoms; and there is so wonderful a resemblance betwixt the transports of choler and those of frenzy, that it is a hard matter to know the one from the other. A bold, fierce, and threatening countenance, as pale as ashes, and, in the same moment, as red as blood; a glaring eye, a wrinkled brow, violent motions, the hands restless and perpetually in action, wringing and menacing, snapping of the joints, stamping with the feet, the hair starting, trembling of the lips, a forced and squeaking voice; the speech false and broken, deep and frequent sighs, and ghastly looks; the veins swell, the heart pants, the knees knock; with a hundred dismal accidents that are common to both distempers. Neither is anger a bare resemblance only of madness, but many times an irrevocable transition into the thing itself. How many persons have we known, read, and heard of, that have lost their wits in a passion, and never came to themselves again? It is therefore to be avoided, not only for moderation’s sake, but also for health. Now, if the outward appearance of anger be so foul and hideous, how deformed must that miserable mind be that is harassed with it? for it leaves no place either for counsel or friendship, honesty or good manners; no place either for the exercise of reason, or for the offices of life. If I were to describe it, I would draw a tiger bathed in blood, sharp set, and ready to take a leap at his prey; or dress it up as the poets represent the furies, with whips, snakes, and flames; it should be sour, livid, full of scars, and wallowing in gore, raging up and down, destroying, grinning, bellowing, and pursuing; sick of all other things, and most of all, itself. It turns beauty into deformity, and the calmest counsels into fierceness: it disorders our very garments, and fills the mind with horror. How abominable is it in the soul then, when it appears so hideous even through the bones, the skin and so many impediments! Is not he a madman that has lost the government of himself, and is tossed hither and thither by his fury as by a tempest? the executioner and the murderer of his nearest friends? The smallest matter moves it, and makes us unsociable and inaccessible. It does all things by violence, as well upon itself as others; and it is, in short; the master of all passions. There is not any creature so terrible and dangerous by nature, but it becomes fiercer by anger. Not that beasts have human affections, but certain impulses they have which come very near them. The boar foams, champs, and whets his tusks; the bull tosses his horns in the air, bounds, and tears up the ground with his feet; the lion roars and swinges himself with his tail; the serpent swells; and there is a ghastly kind of fellness in the aspect of a mad dog. How great a wickedness is it now to indulge a violence, that does not only turn a man into a beast, but makes even the most outrageous of beasts themselves to be more dreadful and mischievous! A vice that carries along with it neither pleasure nor profit, neither honor nor security; but on the contrary, destroys us to all the comfortable and glorious purposes of our reasonable being. Some there are, that will have the root of it to be the greatness of mind. And, why may we not as well entitle impudence to courage, whereas the one is proud, the other brave; the one is gracious and gentle, the other rude and furious? At the same rate we may ascribe magnanimity to avarice, luxury, and ambition, which are all but splendid impotences, without measure and without foundation. There is nothing great but what is virtuous, nor indeed truly great, but what is also composed and quiet. Anger, alas! is but a wild impetuous blast, an empty tumor, the very infirmity of woman and children; a brawling, clamorous evil: and the more noise the less courage; as we find it commonly, that the boldest tongues have the faintest hearts.  ANGER IS NEITHER WARRANTABLE NOR USEFUL. In the first place, Anger is unwarrantable as it is unjust: for it falls many times upon the wrong person, and discharges itself upon the innocent instead of the guilty: beside the disproportion of making the most trivial offences to be capital, and punishing an inconsiderate word perhaps with torments, fetters, infamy, or death. It allows a man neither time nor means for defence, but judges a cause without hearing it, and admits of no mediation. It flies into the face of truth itself, if it be of the adverse party; and turns obstinacy in an error, into an argument of justice. It does every thing with agitation and tumult; whereas reason and equity can destroy whole families, if there be occasion for it, even to the extinguishing of their names and memories, without any indecency, either of countenance or action. Secondly, It is unsociable to the highest point; for it spares neither friend nor foe; but tears all to pieces, and casts human nature into a perpetual state of war. It dissolves the bond of mutual society, insomuch that our very companions and relations dare not come near us; it renders us unfit for the ordinary offices of life: for we can neither govern our tongues, our hands, nor any part of our body. It tramples upon the laws of hospitality, and of nations, leaves every man to be his own carver, and all things, public and private, sacred and profane, suffer violence. Thirdly, It is to no purpose. “It is a sad thing,” we cry, “to put up with these injuries, and we are not able to bear them;” as if any man that can bear anger could not bear an injury, which is much more supportable. You will say that anger does some good yet, for it keeps people in awe, and secures a man from contempt; never considering, that it is more dangerous to be feared than despised. Suppose that an angry man could do as much as he threatens; the more terrible, he is still the more odious; and on the other side, if he wants power, he is the more despicable for his anger; for there is nothing more wretched than a choleric huff, that makes a noise, and nobody cares for it. If anger would be valuable because men are afraid of it, why not an adder, a toad, or a scorpion as well? It makes us lead the life of gladiators; we live, and we fight together. We hate the happy, despise the miserable, envy our superiors, insult our inferiors, and there is nothing in the world which we will not do, either for pleasure or profit. To be angry at offenders is to make ourselves the common enemies of mankind, which is both weak and wicked; and we may as well be angry that our thistles do not bring forth apples, or that every pebble in our ground is not an oriental pearl. If we are angry both with young men and with old, because they do offend, why not with infants too, because they will offend? It is laudable to rejoice for anything that is well done; but to be transported for another man’s doing ill, is narrow and sordid. Nor is it for the dignity of virtue to be either angry or sad. It is with a tainted mind as with an ulcer, not only the touch, but the very offer at it, makes us shrink and complain; when we come once to be carried off from our poise, we are lost. In the choice of a sword, we take care that it be wieldy and well mounted; and it concerns us as much to be wary of engaging in the excesses of ungovernable passions. It is not the speed of a horse altogether that pleases us unless we find that he can stop and turn at pleasure. It is a sign of weakness, and a kind of stumbling, for a man to run when he intends only to walk; and it behoves us to have the same command of our mind that we have of our bodies. Besides that the greatest punishment of an injury is the conscience of having done it; and no man suffers more than he that is turned over to the pain of a repentance. How much better is it to compose injuries than to revenge them? For it does not only spend time, but the revenge of one injury exposes to more. In fine, as it is unreasonable to be angry at a crime, it is as foolish to be angry without one. But “may not an honest man then be allowed to be angry at the murder of his father, or the ravishing of his sister or daughter before his face?” No, not at all. I will defend my parents, and I will repay the injuries that are done them; but it is my piety and not my anger, that moves me to it. I will do my duty without fear or confusion, I will not rage, I will not weep; but discharge the office of a good man without forfeiting the dignity of a man. If my father be assaulted, I will endeavor to rescue him; if he be killed, I will do right to his memory; find all this, not in any transport of passion, but in honor and conscience. Neither is there any need of anger where reason does the same thing. A man may be temperate, and yet vigorous, and raise his mind according to the occasion, more or less, as a stone is thrown according to the discretion and intent of the caster. How outrageous have I seen some people for the loss of a monkey or a spaniel! And were it not a shame to have the same sense for a friend that we have for a puppy; and to cry like children, as much for a bauble as for the ruin of our country? This is not the effect of reason, but of infirmity. For a man indeed to expose his person for his prince, or his parents, or his friends, out of a sense of honesty, and judgment of duty, it is, without dispute, a worthy and a glorious action; but it must be done then with sobriety, calmness, and resolution. It is high time to convince the world of the indignity and uselessness of this passion, when it has the authority and recommendation of no less than Aristotle himself, as an affection very much conducing to all heroic actions that require heat and vigor: now, to show, on the other side, that it is not in any case profitable, we shall lay open the obstinate and unbridled madness of it: a wickedness neither sensible of infamy nor of glory, without either modesty or fear; and if it passes once from anger into a hardened hatred, it is incurable. It is either stronger than reason, or it is weaker. If stronger, there is no contending with it; if weaker, reason will do the business without it. Some will have it that an angry man is good-natured and sincere; whereas, in truth, he only lays himself open out of heedlessness and want of caution. If it were in itself good the more of it the better; but in this case, the more the worse; and a wise man does his duty, without the aid of anything that is ill. It is objected by some, that those are the most generous creatures which are the most prone to anger. But, first, reason in man is impetuous in beasts. Secondly, without discipline it runs into audaciousness and temerity; over and above that, the same thing does not help all. If anger helps the lion, it is fear that saves the stag, swiftness the hawk, and flight the pigeon: but man has God for his example (who is never angry) and not the creatures. And yet it is not amiss sometimes to counterfeit anger; as upon the stage; nay, upon the bench, and in the pulpit, where the imitation of it is more effectual than the thing itself. But it is a great error to take this passion either for a companion or for an assistant to virtue; that makes a man incapable of those necessary counsels by which virtue is to govern herself. Those are false and inauspicious powers, and destructive of themselves, which arise only from the accession and fervor of disease. Reason judges according to right; anger will have every thing seem right, whatever it does, and when it has once pitched upon a mistake, it is never to be convinced, but prefers a pertinacity, even in the greatest evil, before the most necessary repentance. Some people are of opinion that anger inflames and animates the soldier; that it is a spur to bold and arduous undertakings; and that it were better to moderate than to wholly suppress it, for fear of dissolving the spirit and force of the mind. To this I answer, that virtue does not need the help of vice; but where there is any ardor of mind necessary, we may rouse ourselves, and be more or less brisk and vigorous as there is occasion: but all without anger still. It is a mistake to say, that we may make use of anger as a common soldier, but not as a commander; for if it hears reason, and follows orders, it is not properly anger; and if it does not, it is contumacious and mutinous. By this argument a man must be angry to be valiant; covetous to be industrious; timorous to be safe, which makes our reason confederate with our affections. And it is all one whether passion be inconsiderate without reason, or reason ineffectual without passion; since the one cannot be without the other. It is true, the less the passion, the less is the mischief; for a little passion is the smaller evil. Nay, so far is it from being of use or advantage in the field, that it is in place of all others where it is the most dangerous; for the actions of war are to be managed with order and caution, not precipitation and fancy; whereas anger is heedless and heady, and the virtue only of barbarous nations; which, though their bodies were much stronger and more hardened, were still worsted by the moderation and discipline of the Romans. There is not upon the face of the earth a bolder or a more indefatigable nation than the Germans; not a braver upon a charge, nor a hardier against colds and heats; their only delights and exercise is in arms, to the utter neglect of all things else: and, yet upon the encounter, they are broken and destroyed through their own undisciplined temerity, even by the most effeminate of men. The huntsman is not angry with the wild boar when he either pursues or receives him; a good swordsman watches his opportunity, and keeps himself upon his guard, whereas passion lays a man open: nay, it is one of the prime lessons in a fencing-school to learn not to be angry. If Fabius had been choleric, Rome had been lost; and before he conquered Hannibal he overcame himself. If Scipio had been angry, he would never have left Hannibal and his army (who were the proper objects of his displeasure) to carry the war into Afric and so compass his end by a more temperate way. Nay, he was so slow, that it was charged upon him for want of mettle and resolution. And what did the other Scipio? (Africanus I mean:) how much time did he spend before Numantia, to the common grief both of his country and himself? Though he reduced it at last by so miserable a famine, that the inhabitants laid violent hands upon themselves, and left neither man, woman, nor child, to survive the ruins of it. If anger makes a man fight better, so does wine, frenzy, nay, and fear itself; for the greatest coward in despair does the greatest wonders. No man is courageous in his anger that was not so without it. But put the case, that anger by accident may have done some good, and so have fevers removed some distempers; but it is an odious kind of remedy that makes us indebted to a disease for a cure. How many men have been preserved by poison; by a fall from a precipice; by a shipwreck; by a tempest! does it therefore follow that we are to recommend the practice of these experiments? “But in case of an exemplary and prostitute dissolution of manners, when Clodius shall be preferred, and Cicero rejected; when loyalty shall be broken upon the wheel, and treason sit triumphant upon the bench; is not this a subject to move the choler of any virtuous man?” No, by no means, virtue will never allow of the correcting of one vice by another; or that anger, which is the greater crime of the two, should presume to punish the less. It is the natural property of virtue to make a man serene and cheerful; and it is not for the dignity of a philosopher to be transported either with grief or anger; and then the end of anger is sorrow, the constant effect of disappointment and repentance. But, to my purpose. If a man should be angry at wickedness, the greater the wickedness is, the greater must be his anger; and, so long as there is wickedness in the world he must never be pleased: which makes his quiet dependent upon the humor or manners of others. There passes not a day over our heads but he that is choleric shall have some cause or other of displeasure, either from men, accidents, or business. He shall never stir out of his house but he shall meet with criminals of all sorts; prodigal, impudent, covetous, perfidious, contentious, children persecuting their parents, parents cursing their children, the innocent accused, the delinquent acquitted, and the judge practicing that in his chamber which he condemns upon the bench. In fine, wherever there are men there are faults; and upon these terms, Socrates himself should never bring the same countenance home again that he carried out with him. If anger was sufferable in any case, it might be allowed against an incorrigible criminal under the hand of justice: but punishment is not matter of anger but of caution. The law is without passion, and strikes malefactors as we do serpents and venomous creatures, for fear of greater mischief. It is not for the dignity of a judge, when he comes to pronounce the fatal sentence, to express any motions of anger in his looks, words, or gestures: for he condemns the vice, not the man; and looks upon the wickedness without anger, as he does upon the prosperity of wicked men without envy. But though he be not angry, I would have him a little moved in point of humanity; but yet without any offence, either to his place or wisdom. Our passions vary, but reason is equal; and it were a great folly for that which is stable, faithful, and sound, to repair for succor to that which is uncertain, false, and distempered. If the offender be incurable, take him out of the world, that if he will not be good he may cease to be evil; but this must be without anger too. Does any man hate an arm, or a leg, when he cuts it off; or reckon that a passion which is only a miserable cure? We knock mad dogs on the head, and remove scabbed sheep out of the fold: and this is not anger still, but reason, to separate the sick from the sound. Justice cannot be angry; nor is there any need of an angry magistrate for the punishment of foolish and wicked men. The power of life and death must not be managed with passion. We give a horse the spur that is restive or jadish, and tries to cast his rider; but this is without anger too, and only to take down his stomach, and bring him, by correction, to obedience. It is true, that correction is necessary, yet within reason and bounds; for it does not hurt, but profits us under an appearance of harm. Ill dispositions in the mind are to be dealt with as those in the body: the physician first tries purging and abstinence; if this will not do, he proceeds to bleeding, nay, to dismembering rather than fail; for there is no operation too severe that ends in health. The public magistrate begins with persuasion, and his business is to beget a detestation for vice, and a veneration for virtue; from thence, if need be, he advances to admonition and reproach, and then to punishments; but moderate and revocable, unless the wickedness be incurable, and then the punishment must be so too. There is only this difference, the physician when he cannot save his patient’s life, endeavors to make his death easy; but the magistrate aggravates the death of the criminal with infamy and disgrace; not as delighting in the severity of it, (for no good man can be so barbarous) but for example, and to the end that they that will do no good living may do some dead. The end of all correction is either the amendment of wicked men, or to prevent the influence of ill example: for men are punished with a respect to the future; not to expiate offenses committed, but for fear of worse to come. Public offenders must be a terror to others; but still, all this while, the power of life and death must not be managed with passion. The medicine, in the mean time must be suited to the disease; infamy cures one, pain another, exile cures a third, beggary a fourth; but there are some that are only to be cured by the gibbet. I would be no more angry with a thief, or a traitor, than I am angry with myself when I open a vein. All punishment is but a moral or civil remedy. I do not do anything that is very ill, but yet I transgress often. Try me first with a private reprehension, and then with a public; if that will not serve, see what banishment will do; if not that neither, load me with chains, lay me in prison: but if I should prove wicked for wickedness’ sake, and leave no hope of reclaiming me, it would be a kind of mercy to destroy me. Vice is incorporated with me; and there is no remedy but the taking of both away together; but still without anger.   ANGER IN GENERAL, WITH THE DANGER AND EFFECTS OF IT. There is no surer argument of a great mind than not to be transported to anger by any accident; the clouds and the tempests are formed below, but all above is quiet and serene; which is the emblem of a brave man, that suppresses all provocations, and lives within himself, modest, venerable, and composed: whereas anger is a turbulent humor, which, at first dash, casts off all shame, without any regard to order, measure, or good manners; transporting a man into misbecoming violences with his tongue, his hands, and every part of his body. And whoever considers the foulness and the brutality of this vice, must acknowledge that there is no such monster in Nature as one man raging against another, and laboring to sink that which can never be drowned but with himself for company. It renders us incapable either of discourse or of other common duties. It is of all passions the most powerful; for it makes a man that is in love to kill his mistress, the ambitious man to trample upon his honors, and the covetous to throw away his fortune. There is not any mortal that lives free from the danger of it; for it makes even the heavy and the good-natured to be fierce and outrageous: it invades us like a pestilence, the lusty as well as the weak; and it is not either strength of body, or a good diet, that can secure us against it; nay, the most learned, and men otherwise of exemplary sobriety, are infected with it. It is so potent a passion that Socrates durst not trust himself with it. “Sirrah,” says he to his man, “now would I beat you, if I were not angry with you!” There is no age or sect of men that escapes it. Other vices take us one by one; but this, like an epidemical contagion, sweeps all: men, women, and children, princes and beggars, are carried away with it in shoals and troops as one man. It was never seen that a whole nation was in love with one woman, or unanimously bent upon one vice: but here and there some particular men are tainted with some particular crimes; whereas in anger, a single word many times inflames the whole multitude, and men betake themselves presently to fire and sword upon it; the rabble take upon them to give laws to their governors; the common soldiers to their officers, to the ruin, not only of private families, but of kingdoms: turning their arms against their own leaders, and choosing their own generals. There is no public council, no putting things to the vote; but in a rage the mutineers divide from the senate, name their head, force the nobility in their own houses, and put them to death with their own hands. The laws of nations are violated, the persons of public ministers affronted, whole cities infected with a general madness, and no respite allowed for the abatement or discussing of this public tumor. The ships are crowded with tumultuary soldiers; and in this rude and ill-boding manner they march, and act under the conduct only of their own passions. Whatever comes next serves them for arms, until at last they pay for their licentious rashness with the slaughter of the whole party: this is the event of a heady and inconsiderate war. When men’s minds are struck with the opinion of an injury, they fall on immediately wheresoever their passion leads them, without either order, fear, or caution: provoking their own mischief; never at rest till they come to blows; and pursuing their revenge, even with their bodies, upon the points of their enemies’ weapons. So that the anger itself is much more hurtful for us than the injury that provokes it; for the one is bounded, but where the other will stop, no man living knows. There are no greater slaves certainly, than those that serve anger; for they improve their misfortunes by an impatience more insupportable than the calamity that causes it. Nor does it rise by degrees, as other passions, but flashes like gunpowder, blowing up all in a moment. Neither does it only press to the mark, but overbears everything in the way to it. Other vices drive us, but this hurries us headlong; other passions stand firm themselves, though perhaps we cannot resist them; but this consumes and destroys itself: it falls like thunder or a tempest, with an irrevocable violence, that gathers strength in the passage, and then evaporates in the conclusion. Other vices are unreasonable, but this is unhealthful too; other distempers have their intervals and degrees, but in this we are thrown down as from a precipice: there is not anything so amazing to others, or so destructive to itself; so proud and insolent if it succeeds, or so extravagant if it be disappointed. No repulse discourages it, and, for want of other matter to work upon, it falls foul upon itself; and, let the ground be never so trivial, it is sufficient for the wildest outrage imaginable. It spares neither age, sex, nor quality. Some people would be luxurious perchance, but that they are poor; and others lazy, if they were not perpetually kept at work. The simplicity of a country life, keeps many men in ignorance of the frauds and impieties of courts and camps: but no nation or condition of men is exempt from the impressions of anger; and it is equally dangerous, as well in war as in peace. We find that elephants will be made familiar; bulls will suffer children to ride upon their backs, and play with their horns; bears and lions, by good usage, will be brought to fawn upon their masters; how desperate a madness is it then for men, after the reclaiming of the fiercest of beasts, and the bringing of them to be tractable and domestic, to become yet worse than beasts one to another! Alexander had two friends, Clytus and Lysimachus; the one he exposed to a lion, the other to himself; and he that was turned loose to the beast escaped. Why do we not rather make the best of a short life, and render ourselves amiable to all while we live, and desirable when we die? Let us bethink ourselves of our mortality, and not squander away the little time that we have upon animosities and feuds, as if it were never to be at an end. Had we not better enjoy the pleasure of our own life than to be still contriving how to gall and torment another’s? in all our brawlings and contentions never so much as dreaming of our weakness. Do we not know that these implacable enmities of ours lie at the mercy of a fever, or any petty accident, to disappoint? Our fate is at hand, and the very hour that we have set for another man’s death may peradventure be prevented by our own. What is it that we make all this bustle for, and so needlessly disquiet our minds? We are offended with our servants, our masters, our princes, our clients: it is but a little patience, and we shall be all of us equal; so that there is no need either of ambushes or of combats. Our wrath cannot go beyond death; and death will most undoubtedly come whether we be peevish or quiet. It is time lost to take pains to do that which will infallibly be done without us. But suppose that we would only have our enemy banished, disgraced, or damaged, let his punishment be more or less, it is yet too long, either for him to be inhumanly tormented, or for us ourselves to be most barbarously pleased with it. It holds in anger as in mourning, it must and it will at last fall of itself; let us look to it then betimes, for when it is once come to an ill habit, we shall never want matter to feed it; and it is much better to overcome our passions than to be overcome by them. Some way or other, either our parents, children, servants, acquaintance, or strangers, will be continually vexing us. We are tossed hither and thither by our affections, like a feather in a storm, and by fresh provocations the madness becomes perpetual. Miserable creatures! that ever our precious hours should be so ill employed! How prone and eager are we in our hatred, and how backward in our love! Were it not much better now to be making of friendships, pacifying of enemies, doing of good offices both public and private, than to be still meditating of mischief, and designing how to wound one man in his fame, another in his fortune, a third in his person? the one being so easy, innocent, and safe, and the other so difficult, impious, and hazardous. Nay, take a man in chains, and at the foot of his oppressor; how many are there, who, even in this case, have maimed themselves in the heat of their violence upon others. This untractable passion is much more easily kept out than governed when it is once admitted; for the stronger will give laws to the weaker; and make reason a slave to the appetite. It carries us headlong; and in the course of our fury, we have no more command of our minds, than we have of our bodies down a precipice: when they are once in motion, there is no stop until they come to the bottom. Not but that it is possible for a man to be warm in winter, and not to sweat in the summer, either by the benefit of the place, or the hardiness of the body: and in like manner we may provide against anger. But certain it is, that virtue and vice can never agree in the same subject; and one may as well be a sick man and a sound at the same time, as a good man, and an angry. Besides, if we will needs be quarrelsome, it must be either with our superior, our equal, or inferior. To contend with our superior is folly and madness: with our equals, it is doubtful and dangerous: and with our inferiors, it is base. For does any man know but that he that is now our enemy may come hereafter to be our friend, over and above the reputation of clemency and good nature? And what can be more honorable or comfortable, than to exchange a feud for a friendship? The people of Rome never had more faithful allies than those that were at first the most obstinate enemies; neither had the Roman Empire ever arrived at that height of power, if Providence had not mingled the vanquished with the conquerors. There is an end of the contest when one side deserts it; so that the paying of anger with benefits puts a period to the controversy. But, however, if it be our fortune to transgress, let not our anger descend to the children, friends or relations, even of our bitterest enemies. The very cruelty of Sylla was heightened by that instance of incapacitating the issue of the proscribed. It is inhuman to entail the hatred we have for the father upon his posterity. A good and a wise man is not to be an enemy of wicked men, but a reprover of them; and he is to look upon all the drunkards, the lustful, the thankless, covetous, and ambitious, that he meets with, not otherwise than as a physician looks upon his patients; for he that will be angry with any man must be displeased with all; which were as ridiculous as to quarrel with a body for stumbling in the dark; with one that is deaf, for not doing as you bid him; or with a school-boy for loving his play better than his book. Democritus laughed, and Heraclitus wept, at the folly and wickedness of the world, but we never read of any angry philosopher. This is undoubtedly the most detestable of vices, even compared with the worst of them. Avarice scrapes and gathers together that which somebody may be the better for: but anger lashes out, and no man comes off gratis. An angry master makes one servant run away, and another hang himself; and his choler causes him a much greater loss than he suffered in the occasion of it. It is the cause of mourning to the father, and of divorce to the husband: it makes the magistrate odious, and gives the candidate a repulse. And it is worse than luxury too, which only aims at its proper pleasure; whereas the other is bent upon another body’s pain.  The malevolent and the envious content themselves only to wish another man miserable; but it is the business of anger to make him so, and to wreck the mischief itself; not so much desiring the hurt of another, as to inflict it. Among the powerful, it breaks out into open war, and into a private one with the common people, but without force or arms. It engages us in treacheries, perpetual troubles and contentions: it alters the very nature of a man, and punishes itself in the persecution of others. Humanity excites us to love, this to hatred; that to be beneficial to others, this to hurt them: beside, that, though it proceeds from too high a conceit of ourselves, it is yet, in effect, but a narrow and contemptible affection; especially when it meets with a mind that is hard and impenetrable, and returns the dart upon the head of him that casts it. To take a farther view, now, of the miserable consequences and sanguinary effects of this hideous distemper; from hence come slaughters and poisons, wars, and desolations, the razing and burning of cities; the unpeopling of nations, and the turning of populous countries into deserts, public massacres and regicides; princes led in triumph; some murdered in their bed-chambers; others stabbed in the senate or cut off in the security of their spectacles and pleasures. Some there are that take anger for a princely quality; as Darius, who, in his expedition against the Scythians, being besought by a nobleman, that had three sons, that he would vouchsafe to accept of two of them into his service, and leave the third at home for a comfort to his father. “I will do more for you than that,” says Darius, “for you shall have them all three again;” so he ordered them to be slain before his face, and left him their bodies. But Xerxes dealt a little better with Pythius, who had five sons, and desired only one of them for himself. Xerxes bade him take his choice, and he named the eldest, whom he immediately commanded to be cut in halves; and one half of the body to be laid on each side of the way when his army was to pass betwixt them; undoubtedly a most auspicious sacrifice; but he came afterward to the end that he deserved; for he lived to see that prodigious power scattered and broken: and instead of military and victorious troops, to be encompassed with carcasses. But these, you will say, were only barbarous princes that knew neither civility nor letters; and these savage cruelties will be imputed perchance to their rudeness of manners, and want of discipline. But what will you say then of Alexander the Great, that was trained up under the institution of Aristotle himself, and killed Clytus, his favorite and schoolfellow, with his own hand, under his own roof, and over the freedom of a cup of wine? And what was his crime? He was loth to degenerate from a Macedonian liberty into a Persian slavery; that is to say, he could not flatter. Lysimachus, another of his friends, he exposed to a lion; and this very Lysimachus, after he had escaped this danger, was never the more merciful when he came to reign himself; for he cut off the ears and nose of his friend Telesphorous; and when he had so disfigured him that he had no longer the face of a man, he threw him into a dungeon, and there kept him to be showed for a monster, as a strange sight. The place was so low that he was fain to creep upon all fours, and his sides were galled too with the straitness of it. In this misery he lay half-famished in his own filth; so odious, so terrible, and so loathsome a spectacle, that the horror of his condition had even extinguished all pity for him. “Nothing was ever so unlike a mar as the poor wretch that suffered this, saving the tyrant that acted it.” Nor did this merciless hardness only exercise itself among foreigners, but the fierceness of their outrages and punishments, as well as their vices, brake in upon the Romans. C. Marius, that had his statue set up everywhere, and was adored as a God, L. Sylla commanded his bones to be broken, his eyes to be pulled out, his hands to be cut off; and, as if every wound had been a several death, his body to be torn to pieces, and Catiline was the executioner. A cruelty that was only fit for Marius to suffer, Sylla to command, and Catiline to act; but most dishonorable and fatal to the commonwealth, to fall indifferently upon the sword’s point both of citizens and of enemies. It was a severe instance, that of Piso too. A soldier that had leave to go abroad with his comrade, came back to the camp at his time, but without his companion. Piso condemned him to die, as if he had killed him, and appoints a centurion to see the execution. Just as the headsman was ready to do his office, the other soldier appeared, to the great joy of the whole field, and the centurion bade the executioner hold his hand. Hereupon Piso, in a rage, mounts the tribunal, and sentences all three to death: the one because he was condemned, the other because it was for his sake that his fellow-soldier was condemned, the centurion for not obeying the order of his superior. An ingenious piece of inhumanity, to contrive how to make three criminals, where effectively there were none. There was a Persian king that caused the noses of a whole nation to be cut off, and they were to thank him that he spared their heads. And this, perhaps, would have been the fate of the Macrobii, (if Providence had not hindered it,) for the freedom they used to Cambyses’ ambassadors, in not accepting the slavish terms that were offered them. This put Cambyses into such a rage, that he presently listed into his service every man that was able to bear arms; and, without either provisions or guides, marched immediately through dry and barren deserts, and where never any man had passed before him, to take his revenge. Before he was a third part of the way, his provisions failed him. His men, at first, made shift with the buds of trees, boiled leather, and the like; but soon after there was not so much as a root or a plant to be gotten, nor a living creature to be seen; and then by lot every tenth man was to die for a nourishment to the rest, which was still worse than the famine. But yet this passionate king went on so far, until one part of his army was lost, and the other devoured, and until he feared that he himself might come to be served with the same sauce. So that at last he ordered a retreat, wanting no delicates all this while for himself, while his soldiers were taking their chance who should die miserably, or live worse. Here was an anger taken up against a whole nation, that neither deserved any ill from him, nor was so much as known to him.  . THE ORDINARY GROUNDS AND OCCASIONS OF ANGER. In this wandering state of life we meet with many occasions of trouble and displeasure, both great and trivial; and not a day passes but, from men or things, we have some cause or other for offense; as a man must expect to be jostled, dashed, and crowded, in a populous city. One man deceives our expectation; another delays it; and a third crosses it; and if everything does not succeed to our wish, we presently fall out either with the person, the business, the place, our fortune, or ourselves. Some men value themselves upon their wit, and will never forgive anyone that pretends to lessen it; others are inflamed by wine: and some are distempered by sickness, weariness, watchings, love, care, etc. Some are prone to it, by heat of constitution; but moist, dry, and cold complexions are more liable to other affections; as suspicion, despair, fear, jealousy, etc. But most of our quarrels are of our own contriving. One while we suspect upon mistake; and another while we make a great matter of trifles. To say the truth, most of those things that exasperate us are rather subjects of disgust than of mischief: there is a large difference betwixt opposing a man’s satisfaction and not assisting it: betwixt taking away and not giving; but we reckon upon denying and deferring as the same thing; and interpret another’s being for himself as if he were against us. Nay, we do many times entertain an ill opinion of well doing, and a good one of the contrary: and we hate a man for doing that very thing which we should hate him for on the other side, if he did not do it. We take it ill to be opposed when there is a father perhaps, a brother, or a friend, in the case against us; when we should rather love a man for it; and only wish that he could be honestly of our party. We approve of the fact, and detest the doer of it. It is a base thing to hate the person whom we cannot but commend; but it is a great deal worse yet if we hate him for the very thing that deserves commendation. The things that we desire, if they be such as cannot be given to one without being taken away from another, must needs set those people together by the ears that desire the same thing. One man has a design upon my mistress, another upon mine inheritance; and that which should make friends makes enemies, our being all of a mind. The general cause of anger is the sense or opinion of an injury; that is, the opinion either of an injury simply done, or of an injury done, which we have not deserved. Some are naturally given to anger, others are provoked to it by occasion; the anger of women and children is commonly sharp, but not lasting: old men are rather querulous and peevish. Hard labor, diseases, anxiety of thought, and whatsoever hurts the body or the mind, disposes a man to be froward, but we must not add fire to fire. He that duly considers the subject-matter of all our controversies and quarrels, will find them low and mean, not worth the thought of a generous mind; but the greatest noise of all is about money. This is it that sets fathers and children together by the ears, husbands and wives; and makes way for sword and poison. This is it that tires out courts of justice, enrages princes, and lays cities in the dust, to seek for gold and silver in the ruins of them. This is it that finds work for the judge to determine which side is least in the wrong; and whose is the more plausible avarice, the plaintiff’s or the defendant’s. And what is it that we contend for all this while, but those baubles that make us cry when we should laugh? To see a rich old cuff, that has nobody to leave his estate to, break his heart for a handful of dirt; and a gouty usurer, that has no other use of his fingers left him but to count withal; to see him, I say in the extremity of his fit, wrangling for the odd money in his interest. If all that is precious in Nature were gathered into one mass, it were not worth the trouble of a sober mind. It were endless to run over all those ridiculous passions that are moved about meats and drinks, and the matter of our luxury; nay, about words, looks, actions, jealousies, mistakes, which are all of them as contemptible fooleries as those very baubles that children scratch and cry for. There is nothing great or serious in all that which we keep such a clutter about; the madness of it is, that we set too great a value upon trifles. One man flies out upon a salute, a letter, a speech, a question, a gesture, a wink, a look. An action moves one man; a word affects another; one man is tender of his family; another of his person; one sets up for an orator, another for a philosopher: this man will not bear pride, nor that man opposition. He that plays the tyrant at home, is gentle as a lamb abroad. Some take offense if a man ask a favor of them, and others, if he does not. Every man has his weak side; let us learn which that is, and take a care of it; for the same thing does not work upon all men alike. We are moved like beasts at the idle appearances of things, and the fiercer the creature, the more is it startled. The sight of a red coat enrages a bull; a shadow provokes the asp; nay, so unreasonable are some men, that they take moderate benefits for injuries, and squabble about it with their nearest relations: “They have done this and that for others,” they cry; “and they might have dealt better with us if they had pleased.” Very good! and if it be less than we looked for, it may be yet more than we deserve. Of all unquiet humors this is the worst, that will never suffer any man to be happy, so long as he sees a happier man than himself. I have known some men so weak as to think themselves contemned if a horse did but play the jade with them, that is yet obedient to another rider. A brutal folly to be offended at a mute animal; for no injury can be done us without the concurrence of reason. A beast may hurt us, as a sword or a stone, and no otherwise. Nay, there are that will complain of “foul weather, a raging sea, a biting winter,” as if it were expressly directed to them; and this they charge upon Providence, whose operations are all of them so far from being injurious, that they are beneficial to us. How vain and idle are many of those things that make us stark mad! A resty horse, the overturning of a glass, the falling of a key, the dragging of a chair, a jealousy, a misconstruction. How shall that man endure the extremities of hunger and thirst that flies out into a rage for putting of a little too much water in his wine? What haste is there to lay a servant by the heels, or break a leg or an arm immediately for it, as if he were not to have the same power over him an hour after, that he has at that instant? The answer of a servant, a wife, a tenant, puts some people out of all patience; and yet they can quarrel with the government, for not allowing them the same liberty in public, which they themselves deny to their own families. If they say nothing, it is contumacy: if they speak or laugh, it is insolence. As if a man had his ears given him only for music; whereas we must suffer all sorts of noises, good and bad, both of man and beast. How idle is it to start at the tinkling of a bell, or the creaking of a door, when, for all this delicacy, we must endure thunder! Neither are our eyes less curious and fantastical than our ears. When we are abroad, we can bear well enough with foul ways, nasty streets, noisome ditches; but a spot upon a dish at home, or an unswept hearth, absolutely distracts us. And what is the reason, but that we are patient in the one place, and fantastically peevish in the other? Nothing makes us more intemperate than luxury, that shrinks at every stroke, and starts at every shadow. It is death to some to have another sit above them, as if a body were ever the more or the less honest for the cushion. But they are only weak creatures that think themselves wounded if they be but touched. One of the Sybarites, that saw a fellow hard at work a digging, desired him to give over, for it made him weary to see him: and it was an ordinary complaint with him, that “he could take no rest because the rose-leaves lay double under him.” When we are once weakened with our pleasures, everything grows intolerable. And we are angry as well with those things that cannot hurt us as with those that do. We tear a book because it is blotted; and our clothes, because they are not well made: things that neither deserve our anger nor feel it: the tailor, perchance, did his best, or, however, had no intent to displease us: if so, first, why should we be angry at all? Secondly, why should we be angry with the thing for the man’s sake? Nay, our anger extends even to dogs, horses, and other beasts. It was a blasphemous and a sottish extravagance, that of Caius Cæsar, who challenged Jupiter for making such a noise with his thunder, that he could not hear his mimics, and so invented a machine in imitation of it to oppose thunder to thunder; a brutal conceit, to imagine, either that he could reach the Almighty, or that the Almighty could not reach him! And every jot as ridiculous, though not so impious, was that of Cyrus; who, in his design upon Babylon, found a river in his way that put a stop to his march: the current was strong, and carried away one of the horses that belonged to his own chariot: upon this he swore, that since it had obstructed his passage, it should never hinder any body’s else; and presently set his whole army to work upon it, which diverted it into a hundred and fourscore channels, and laid it dry. In this ignoble and unprofitable employment he lost his time, and the soldiers their courage, and gave his adversaries an opportunity of providing themselves, while he was waging war with a river instead of an enemy.  I. ADVICE IN THE CASES OF CONTUMELY AND REVENGE. Of provocations to anger there are two sorts; there is an injury, and there is a contumely. The former in its own nature is the heavier; the other slight in itself, and only troublesome to a wounded imagination. And yet some there are that will bear blows, and death itself, rather than contumelious words. A contumely is an indignity below the consideration of the very law; and not worthy either of a revenge, or so much as a complaint. It is only the vexation and infirmity of a weak mind, as well as the practice of a haughty and insolent nature, and signifies no more to a wise and sober man than an idle dream, that is no sooner past than forgotten. It is true, it implies contempt; but what needs any man care for being contemptible to others, if he be not so to himself? For a child in the arms to strike the mother, tear her hair, claw the face of her, and call her names, that goes for nothing with us, because the child knows not what he does. Neither are we moved at the impudence and bitterness of a buffoon, though he fall upon his own master as well as the guests; but, on the contrary, we encourage and entertain the freedom. Are we not mad then, to be delighted and displeased with the same thing, and to take that as an injury from one man, which passes only for a raillery from another? He that is wise will behave himself toward all men as we do to our children; for they are but children too, though they have gray hairs: they are indeed of a larger size, and their errors are grown up with them; they live without rule, they covet without choice, they are timorous and unsteady; and if at any time they happen to be quiet, it is more out of fear than reason. It is a wretched condition to stand in awe of everybody’s tongue; and whosoever is vexed at a reproach would be proud if he were commended. We should look upon contumelies, slanders, and ill words, only as the clamor of enemies, or arrows shot at a distance, that make a clattering upon our arms, but do no execution. A man makes himself less than his adversary by fancying that he is contemned. Things are only ill that are ill taken; and it is not for a man of worth to think himself better or worse for the opinion of others. He that thinks himself injured, let him say, “Either I have deserved this, or I have not. If I have, it is a judgment; if I have not, it is an injustice: and the doer of it has more reason to be ashamed than the sufferers.” Nature has assigned every man his post, which he is bound in honor to maintain, let him be never so much pressed. Diogenes was disputing of anger, and an insolent young fellow, to try if he could put him beside his philosophy, spit in his face: “Young man,” says Diogenes, “this does not make me angry yet; but I am in some doubt whether I should be so or not.” Some are so impatient that they cannot bear a contumely, even from a woman; whose very beauty, greatness, and ornaments, are all of them little enough to vindicate her from any indecencies, without much modesty and discretion; nay, they will lay it to heart even from the meanest of servants. How wretched is that man whose peace lies at the mercy of the people? A physician is not angry at the intemperance of a mad patient; nor does he take it ill to be railed at by a man in a fever; just so should a wise man treat all mankind as a physician does his patient; and looking upon them only as sick and extravagant, let their words and actions, whether good or bad, go equally for nothing, attending still his duty even in the coarsest offices that may conduce to their recovery. Men that are proud, froward, and powerful, he values their scorn as little as their quality, and looks upon them no otherwise than as people in the excess of a fever. If a beggar worships him, or if he takes no notice of him, it is all one to him; and with a rich man he makes it the same case. Their honors and their injuries he accounts much alike; without rejoicing at the one, or grieving at the other. In these cases, the rule is to pardon all offenses, where there is any sign of repentance, or hope of amendment. It does not hold in injuries as in benefits, the requiting of the one with the other; for it is a shame to overcome in the one, and in the other to be overcome. It is the part of a great mind to despise injuries; and it is one kind of revenge to neglect a man as not worth it: for it makes the first aggressor too considerable. Our philosophy, methinks, might carry us up to the bravery of a generous mastiff, that can hear the barking of a thousand curs without taking any notice of them. He that receives an injury from his superior, it is not enough for him to bear it with patience, and without any thought of revenge, but he must receive it with a cheerful countenance, and look as if he did not understand it too; for if he appear too sensible, he shall be sure to have more of it. “It is a damned humor in great men, that whom they wrong they will hate.” It is well answered of an old courtier, that was asked how he kept so long in favor? “Why,” says he, “by receiving injuries, and crying your humble servant for them.” Some men take it for an argument of greatness to have revenge in their power; but so far is he that is under the dominion of anger from being great, that he is not so much as free. Not but that anger is a kind of pleasure to some in the act of revenge; but the very word is inhuman, though it may pass for honest. “Virtue,” in short, “is impenetrable, and revenge is only the confession of an infirmity.” It is a fantastical humor, that the same jest in private should make us merry, and yet enrage us in public; nay, we will not allow the liberty that we take. Some railleries we account pleasant, others bitter: a conceit upon a squint-eye, a hunch-back, or any personal defect, passes for a reproach. And why may we not as well hear it as see it? Nay, if a man imitates our gait, speech, or any natural imperfection, it puts us out of all patience; as if the counterfeit were more grievous than the doing of the thing itself. Some cannot endure to hear of their age, nor others of their poverty; and they make the thing the more taken notice of the more they desire to hide it. Some bitter jest (for the purpose) was broken upon you at the table: keep better company then. In the freedom of cups, a sober man will hardly contain himself within bounds. It sticks with us extremely sometimes, that the porter will not let us in to his great master. Will any but a madman quarrel with a cur for barking, when he may pacify him with a crust? What have we to do but to keep further off, and laugh at him? Fidus Cornelius (a tall slim fellow) fell downright a-crying in the senate-house at Corbulo’s saying that “he looked like an ostrich.” He was a man that made nothing of a lash upon his life and manners; but it was worse than death to him a reflection upon his person. No man was ever ridiculous to others that laughed at himself first: it prevents mischief, and it is a spiteful disappointment of those that take pleasure in such abuses. Vatinius, (a man that was made up for scorn and hatred, scurrilous and impudent to the highest degree, but most abusively witty and with all this he was diseased, and deformed to extremity), his way, was always to make sport with himself, and so he prevented the mockeries of other people. There are none more abusive to others than they that lie most open to it themselves; but the humor goes round, and he that laughs at me to-day will have somebody to laugh at him to-morrow, and revenge my quarrel. But, however, there are some liberties that will never go down with some men. Asiaticus Valerius, (one of Caligula’s particular friends, and a man of stomach, that would not easily digest an affront) Caligula told him in public what kind of bedfellow his wife was. Good God! that ever any man should hear this, or a prince speak it, especially to a man of consular authority, a friend, and a husband: and in such a manner too as at once to own his disgust and his adultery. The tribune Chæreas had a weak broken voice, like an hermaphrodite; when he came to Caligula for the word, he would give him sometimes Venus, otherwhiles Priapus, as a slur upon him both ways. Valerius was afterwards the principal instrument in the conspiracy against him; and Chæreas, to convince him of his manhood, at one blow cleft him down the chin with his sword. No man was so forward as Caligula to break a jest, and no man so unwilling to bear it.   CAUTIONS AGAINST ANGER IN THE MATTER OF EDUCATION, CONVERSE, AND OTHER GENERAL RULES OF PREVENTING IT, BOTH IN OURSELVES AND OTHERS. All that we have to say in particular upon this subject lies under these two heads: first, that we do not fall into anger; and secondly, that we do not transgress in it. As in the case of our bodies, we have some medicines to preserve us when we are well, and others to recover us when we are sick; so it is one thing not to admit it, and another thing to overcome it. We are, in the first place, to avoid all provocations, and the beginnings of anger: for if we be once down, it is a hard task to get up again. When our passion has got the better of our reason, and the enemy is received into the gate, we cannot expect that the conqueror should take conditions from the prisoner. And, in truth, our reason, when it is thus mastered, turns effectually into passion. A careful education is a great matter; for our minds are easily formed in our youth, but it is a harder business to cure ill habits: beside that, we are inflamed by climate, constitution, company, and a thousand other accidents, that we are not aware of. The choice of a good nurse, and a well-natured tutor, goes a great way: for the sweetness both of the blood and of the manners will pass into the child. There is nothing breeds anger more than a soft and effeminate education; and it is very seldom seen that either the mother’s or the school-master’s darling ever comes to good. But my young master, when he comes into the world, behaves himself like a choleric coxcomb; for flattery, and a great fortune, nourish touchiness. But it is a nice point so to check the seeds of anger in a child as not to take off his edge, and quench his spirits; whereof a principal care must be taken betwixt license and severity, that he be neither too much emboldened nor depressed. Commendation gives him courage and confidence; but then the danger is, of blowing him up into insolence and wrath: so that when to use the bit, and when the spur, is the main difficulty. Never put him to a necessity of begging anything basely: or if he does, let him go without it. Inure him to a familiarity where he has any emulation; and in all his exercises let him understand that it is generous to overcome his competitor, but not to hurt him. Allow him to be pleased when he does well, but not transported; for that will puff him up into too high a conceit of himself. Give him nothing that he cries for till the dogged fit is over, but then let him have it when he is quiet; to show him that there is nothing to be gotten by being peevish. Chide him for whatever he does amiss, and make him betimes acquainted with the fortune that he was born to. Let his diet be cleanly, but sparing; and clothe him like the rest of his fellows: for by placing him upon that equality at first, he will be the less proud afterward: and, consequently the less waspish and quarrelsome. In the next place, let us have a care of temptations that we cannot resist, and provocations that we cannot bear; and especially of sour and exceptious company: for a cross humor is contagious. Nor is it all that a man shall be the better for the example of a quiet conversation; but an angry disposition is troublesome, because it has nothing else to work upon. We should therefore choose a sincere, easy, and temperate companion, that will neither provoke anger nor return it; nor give a man any occasion of exercising his distempers. Nor is it enough to be gentle, submissive, and humane, without integrity and plain-dealing; for flattery is as offensive on the other side. Some men would take a curse from you better than a compliment. Cælius, a passionate orator, had a friend of singular patience that supped with him, who had no way to avoid a quarrel but by saying amen to all that Cælius said. Cælius, taking this ill: “Say something against me,” says he, “that you and I may be two;” and he was angry with him because he would not: but the dispute fell, as it needs must, for want of an opponent. He that is naturally addicted to anger, let him use a moderate diet, and abstain from wine; for it is but adding fire to fire. Gentle exercises, recreations, and sports, temper and sweeten the mind. Let him have a care also of long and obstinate disputes; for it is easier not to begin them than to put an end to them. Severe studies are not good for him either, as law, mathematics; too much attention preys upon the spirits, and makes him eager: but poetry, history and those lighter entertainments, may serve him for diversion and relief. He that would be quiet, must not venture at things out of his reach, or beyond his strength; for he shall either stagger under the burden, or discharge it upon the next man he meets; which is the same case in civil and domestic affairs. Business that is ready and practicable goes off with ease; but when it is too heavy for the bearer, they fall both together. Whatsoever we design, we should first take a measure of ourselves, and compare our force with the undertaking; for it vexes a man not to go through with his work: a repulse inflames a generous nature, as it makes one that is phlegmatic, sad. I have known some that have advised looking in a glass when a man is in the fit, and the very spectacle of his own deformity has cured him. Many that are troublesome in their drink, and know their own infirmity, give their servant order beforehand to take them away by force for fear of mischief, and not to obey their masters themselves when they are hot-headed. If the thing were duly considered we should need no other cure than the bare consideration of it. We are not angry at madmen, children, and fools, because they do not know what they do: and why should not imprudence have an equal privilege in other cases? If a horse kick, or a dog bite, shall a man kick or bite again? The one, it is true, is wholly void of reason, but it is also an equivalent darkness of mind that possesses the other. So long as we are among men, let us cherish humanity, and so live that no man may be either in fear or in danger of us. Losses, injuries, reproaches, calumnies, they are but short inconveniences, and we should bear them with resolution. Beside that, some people are above our anger, others below it. To contend with our superiors were a folly, and with our inferiors an indignity. There is hardly a more effectual remedy against anger than patience and consideration. Let but the first fervor abate, and that mist which darkens the mind will be either lessened or dispelled; a day, nay, an hour, does much in the most violent cases, and perchance totally suppresses it; time discovers the truth of things, and turns that into judgment which at first was anger. Plato was about to strike his servant, and while his hand was in the air, he checked himself, but still held it in that menacing posture. A friend of his took notice of it, and asked him what he meant? “I am now,” says Plato, “punishing of an angry man;” so that he had left his servant to chastise himself. Another time his servant having committed a great fault: “Speusippus,” says he, “do you beat that fellow, for I am angry,” so that he forebore striking him for the very reason that would have made another man have done it. “I am angry,” says he, “and shall go further than becomes me.” Nor is it fit that a servant should be in his power that is not his own master. Why should any one venture now to trust an angry man with a revenge, when Plato durst not trust himself? Either he must govern that, or that will undo him. Let us do our best to overcome it, but let us, however, keep it close, without giving it any vent. An angry man, if he gives himself liberty at all times, will go too far. If it comes once to show itself in the eye or countenance, it has got the better of us. Nay, we should so oppose it as to put on the very contrary dispositions; calm looks, soft and slow speech, an easy and deliberate march, and by little and little, we may possibly bring our thoughts into sober conformity with our actions. When Socrates was angry, he would take himself in it, and speak low, in opposition to the motions of his displeasure. His friends would take notice of it; and it was not to his disadvantage neither, but rather to his credit, that so many should know that he was angry, and nobody feel it; which could not have been, if he had not given his friends the same liberty of admonition which he himself took. And this course should we take; we should desire our friends not to flatter us in our follies, but to treat us with all liberties of reprehension, even when we are least willing to bear it, against so powerful and so insinuating an evil; we should call for help while we have our eyes in our head, and are yet masters of ourselves. Moderation is profitable for subjects, but more for princes, who have the means of executing all that their anger prompts them to. When that power comes once to be exercised to a common mischief, it can never long continue; a common fear joining in one cause all their divided complaints. In a word now, how we may prevent, moderate, or master this impotent passion in others. It is not enough to be sound ourselves, unless we endeavor to make others so, wherein we must accommodate the remedy to the temper of the patient. Some are to be dealt with by artifice and address: as, for example, “Why will you gratify your enemies to show yourself so much concerned? It is not worth your anger: it is below you: I am as much troubled at it myself as you can be; but you had better say nothing, and take your time to be even with them.” Anger in some people is to be openly opposed; in others, there must be a little yielding, according to the disposition of the person. Some are won by entreaties, others are gained by mere shame and conviction, and some by delay; a dull way of cure for a violent distemper, but this must be the last experiment. Other affections may be better dealt with at leisure; for they proceed gradually: but this commences and perfects itself in the same moment. It does not, like other passions, solicit and mislead us, but it runs away with us by force, and hurries us on with an irresistible temerity, as well to our own as to another’s ruin: not only flying in the face of him that provokes us, but like a torrent, bearing down all before it. There is no encountering the first heat and fury of it: for it is deaf and mad, the best way is (in the beginning) to give it time and rest, and let it spend itself: while the passion is too hot to handle, we may deceive it; but, however, let all instruments of revenge be put out of the way. It is not amiss sometimes to pretend to be angry too; and join with him, not only in the opinion of the injury, but in the seeming contrivance of a revenge. But this must be a person then that has some authority over him. This is a way to get time, and, by advising upon some greater punishment to delay the present. If the passion be outrageous, try what shame or fear can do. If weak, it is no hard matter to amuse it by strange stories, grateful news, or pleasant discourses. Deceit, in this case, is friendship; for men must be cozened to be cured. The injuries that press hardest upon us are those which either we have not deserved, or not expected, or, at least, not in so high a degree. This arises from the love of ourselves: for every man takes upon him, like a prince, in this case, to practice all liberties, and to allow none, which proceeds either from ignorance or insolence. What news is it for people to do ill things? for an enemy to hurt us; nay, for a friend or a servant to transgress, and to prove treacherous, ungrateful, covetous, impious? What we find in one man we may in another, and there is more security in fortune than in men. Our joys are mingled with fear, and a tempest may arise out of a calm; but a skilful pilot is always provided for it.  AGAINST RASH JUDGMENT. It is good for every man to fortify himself on his weak side: and if he loves his peace he must not be inquisitive, and hearken to tale-bearers; for the man that is over-curious to hear and see everything, multiplies troubles to himself: for a man does not feel what he does not know. He that is listening after private discourse, and what people say of him, shall never be at peace. How many things that are innocent in themselves are made injuries yet by misconstruction! Wherefore, some things we are to pause upon, others to laugh at, and others again to pardon. Or, if we cannot avoid the sense of indignities, let us however shun the open profession of it, which may easily be done, as appears by many examples of those that have suppressed their anger under the awe of a greater fear. It is a good caution not to believe any thing until we are very certain of it; for many probable things prove false, and a short time will make evidence of the undoubted truth. We are prone to believe many things which we are willing to hear, and so we conclude, and take up a prejudice before we can judge. Never condemn a friend unheard; or without letting him know his accuser, or his crime. It is a common thing to say, “Do not you tell that you had it from me: for if you do, I will deny it, and never tell you any thing again:” by which means friends are set together by the ears, and the informer slips his neck out of the collar. Admit no stories upon these terms: for it is an unjust thing to believe in private and to be angry openly. He that delivers himself up to guess and conjecture runs a great hazard; for there can be no suspicion without some probable grounds; so that without much candor and simplicity, and making the best of every thing, there is no living in society with mankind. Some things that offend us we have by report; others we see or hear. In the first case, let us not be too credulous: some people frame stories that they may deceive us; others only tell what they hear, and are deceived themselves: some make it their sport to do ill offices, others do them only to pick a thank: there are some that would part the dearest friends in the world; others love to do mischief, and stand aloof off to see what comes of it. If it be a small matter, I would have witnesses; but if it be a greater, I would have it upon oath, and allow time to the accused, and counsel too, and hear over and over again. In those cases where we ourselves are witnesses, we should take into consideration all the circumstances. If a child, it was ignorance: if a woman, a mistake: if done by command a necessity; if a man be injured, it is but quod pro quo: if a judge, he knows what he does: if a prince, I must submit; either if guilty, to justice, or if innocent, to fortune: if a brute, I make myself one by imitating it: if a calamity or disease, my best relief is patience: if providence, it is both impious and vain to be angry at it: if a good man, I will make the best of it: if a bad, I will never wonder at it. Nor is it only by tales and stories that we are inflamed, but suspicions, countenances, nay, a look or a smile, is enough to blow us up. In these cases, let us suspend our displeasure, and plead the cause of the absent. “Perhaps he is innocent; or, if not, I have time to consider of it and may take my revenge at leisure:” but when it is once executed it is not to be recalled. A jealous head is apt to take that to himself which was never meant him. Let us therefore trust to nothing but what we see, and chide ourselves where we are over-credulous. By this course we shall not be so easily imposed upon, nor put to trouble ourselves about things not worth the while: as the loitering of a servant upon an errand, and the tumbling of a bed, or the spilling of a glass of drink. It is a madness to be disordered at these fooleries; we consider the thing done, and not the doer of it. “It may be he did it unwillingly, or by chance. It was a trick put upon him, or he was forced to it. He did it for reward perhaps, not hatred; nor of his own accord, but he was urged on to it.” Nay, some regard must be had to the age of the person, or to fortune; and we must consult humanity and candor in the case. One does me a great mischief at unawares; another does me a very small one by design, or peradventure none at all, but intended me one. The latter was more in fault, but I will be angry with neither. We must distinguish betwixt what a man cannot do and what he will not. “It is true he has once offended me; but how often has he pleased me! He has offended me often, and in other kinds; and why should not I bear it as well now as I have done?” Is he my friend? why then, “It was against his will.” Is he my enemy? It is “no more than I looked for.” Let us give way to wise men, and not squabble with fools; and say thus to ourselves, “We have all of us our errors.” No man is so circumspect, so considerate, or so fearful of offending, but he has much to answer for. A generous prisoner cannot immediately comply with all the sordid and laborious offices of a slave. A footman that is not breathed cannot keep pace with his master’s horse. He that is over-watched may be allowed to be drowsy. All these things are to be weighed before we give any ear to the first impulse. If it be my duty to love my country, I must be kind also to my countrymen; if a veneration be due to the whole, so is a piety also to the parts: and it is the common interest to preserve them. We are all members of one body, and it is as natural to help one another as for the hands to help the feet, or the eyes the hands. Without the love and care of the parts, the whole can never be preserved, and we must spare one another because we are born for society, which cannot be maintained without a regard to particulars. Let this be a rule to us, never to deny a pardon, that does no hurt either to the giver or receiver. That may be well enough in one which is ill in another; and therefore we are not to condemn anything that is common to a nation; for custom defends it. But much more pardonable are those things which are common to mankind. It is a kind of spiteful comfort, that whoever does me an injury may receive one; and that there is a power over him that is above me. A man should stand as firm against all indignities as a rock does against the waves. As it is some satisfaction to a man in a mean condition that there is no security in a more prosperous; and as the loss of a son in a corner is borne with more patience upon the sight of a funeral carried out of a palace; so are injuries and contempts the more tolerable from a meaner person, when we consider, that the greatest men and fortunes are not exempt. The wisest also of mortals have their failings, and no man living is without the same excuse. The difference is, that we do not all of us transgress the same way; but we are obliged in humanity to bear one with another. We should, every one of us, bethink ourselves, how remiss we have been in our duties, how immodest in our discourses, how intemperate in our cups; and why not, as well, how extravagant we have been in our passions? Let us clear ourselves of this evil, purge our minds, and utterly root out all those vices, which upon leaving the least sting, will grow again and recover. We must think of everything, expect everything, that we may not be surprised. It is a shame, says Fabius, for a commander to excuse himself by saying, “I was not aware of it.”   TAKE NOTHING ILL FROM ANOTHER MAN, UNTIL YOU HAVE MADE IT YOUR OWN CASE. It is not prudent to deny a pardon to any man, without first examining if we stand not in need of it ourselves; for it may be our lot to ask it, even at his feet to whom we refuse it. But we are willing enough to do what we are very unwilling to suffer. It is unreasonable to charge public vices upon particular persons; for we are all of us wicked, and that which we blame in others we find in ourselves. It is not a paleness in one, or a leanness in another, but a pestilence that has laid hold upon all. It is a wicked world, and we make part of it; and the way to be quiet is to bear one with another. “Such a man,” we cry, “has done me a shrewd turn, and I never did him any hurt.” Well, but it may be I have mischieved other people, or at least, I may live to do as much to him as that comes to. “Such a one has spoken ill things of me;” but if I first speak ill of him, as I do of many others, this is not an injury, but a repayment. What if he did overshoot himself? He was loth to lose his conceit perhaps, but there was no malice in it; and if he had not done me a mischief, he must have done himself one. How many good offices are there that look like injuries! Nay, how many have been reconciled and good friends after a professed hatred! Before we lay anything to heart, let us ask ourselves if we have not done the same thing to others. But where shall we find an equal judge? He that loves another man’s wife (only because she is another’s) will not suffer his own to be so much looked upon. No man is so fierce against calumny as the evil speaker; none so strict exactors of modesty in a servant as those that are most prodigal of their own. We carry our neighbors’ crimes in sight, and we throw our own over our shoulders. The intemperance of a bad son is chastised by a worse father; and the luxury that we punish in others, we allow to ourselves. The tyrant exclaims against homicide; and sacrilege against theft. We are angry with the persons, but not with the faults. Some things there are that cannot hurt us, and others will not; as good magistrates, parents, tutors, judges; whose reproof or correction we are to take as we do abstinence, bleeding, and other uneasy things, which we are the better for, in which cases, we are not so much to reckon upon what we suffer as upon what we have done. “I take it ill,” says one; and, “I have done nothing,” says another: when, at the same time, we make it worse, by adding arrogance and contumacy to our first error. We cry out presently, “What law have we transgressed?” As if the letter of the law were the sum of our duty, and that piety, humanity, liberality, justice, and faith, were things beside our business. No, no; the rule of human duty is of a greater latitude; and we have many obligations upon us that are not to be found in the statute-books. And yet we fall short of the exactness event of that legal innocency. We have intended one thing and done another; wherein only the want of success has kept us from being criminals. This very thing, methinks, should make us more favorable to delinquents, and to forgive not only ourselves, but the gods too; of whom we seem to have harder thoughts in taking that to be a particular evil directed to us, that befalls us only by the common law of mortality. In fine, no man living can absolve himself to his conscience, though to the world, perhaps, he may. It is true, that we are also condemned to pains and diseases, and to death too, which is no more than the quitting of the soul’s house. But why should any man complain of bondage, that, wheresoever he looks, has his way open to liberty? That precipice, that sea, that river, that well, there is freedom in the bottom of it. It hangs upon every crooked bow; and not only a man’s throat, or his heart, but every vein in his body, opens a passage to it. To conclude, where my proper virtue fails me, I will have recourse to examples, and say to myself, Am I greater than Philip or Augustus, who both of them put up with greater reproaches? Many have pardoned their enemies, and shall not I forgive a neglect, a little freedom of the tongue? Nay, the patience but of a second thought does the business: for though the first shock be violent; take it in parts, and it is subdued. And, to wind up all in one word, the great lesson of mankind, as well in this as in all other cases, is, “to do as we would be done by.”  . OF CRUELTY. There is so near an affinity betwixt anger and cruelty, that many people confound them; as if cruelty were only the execution of anger in the payment of a revenge: which holds in some cases, but not in others. There are a sort of men that take delight in the spilling of human blood, and in the death of those that never did them any injury, nor were ever so much suspected for it; as Apollodorus, Phalaris, Sinis, Procrustus, and others, that burnt men alive; whom we cannot so properly call angry as brutal, for anger does necessarily presuppose an injury, either done, or conceived, or feared, but the other takes pleasure in tormenting, without so much as pretending any provocation to it, and kills merely for killing sake. The original of this cruelty perhaps was anger, which by frequent exercise and custom, has lost all sense of humanity and mercy, and they that are thus affected are so far from the countenance and appearance of men in anger, that they will laugh, rejoice, and entertain themselves with the most horrid spectacles, as racks, jails, gibbets, several sorts of chains and punishments, dilaceration of members, stigmatizing, and wild beasts, with other exquisite inventions of torture; and yet, at last the cruelty itself is more horrid and odious than the means by which it works. It is a bestial madness to love mischief; beside, that it is womanish to rage and tear. A generous beast will scorn to do it when he has any thing at his mercy. It is a vice for wolves and tigers, and no less abominable to the world than dangerous to itself. The Romans had their morning and their meridian spectacles. In the former, they had their combats of men with wild beasts; and in the latter, the men fought one with another. “I went,” says our author, “the other day to the meridian spectacles, in hope of meeting somewhat of mirth and diversion to sweeten the humors of those that had been entertained with blood in the morning; but it proved otherwise, for, compared with this inhumanity, the former was a mercy. The whole business was only murder upon murder: the combatants fought naked, and every blow was a wound. They do not contend for victory, but for death; and he that kills one man is to be killed by another. By wounds they are forced upon wounds which they take and give upon their bare breasts. Burn that rogue, they cry What! Is he afraid of his flesh? Do but see how sneakingly that rascal dies. Look to yourselves, my masters, and consider of it: who knows but this may come to be your own case?” Wicked examples seldom fail of coming home at last to the authors. To destroy a single man may be dangerous; but to murder whole nations is only a more glorious wickedness. Private avarice and rigor are condemned, but oppression, when it comes to be authorized by an act of state, and to be publicly commanded, though particularly forbidden, becomes a point of dignity and honor. What a shame is it for men to interworry one another, when yet the fiercest even of beasts are at peace with those of their own kind? This brutal fury puts philosophy itself to a stand. The drunkard, the glutton, the covetous, may be reduced; nay, and the mischief of it is that no vice keeps itself within its proper bounds. Luxury runs into avarice, and when the reverence of virtue is extinguished, men will stick at nothing that carries profit along with it; man’s blood is shed in wantonness—his death is a spectacle for entertainment, and his groans are music. When Alexander delivered up Lysimachus to a lion, how glad would he have been to have had nails and teeth to have devoured him himself: it would have too much derogated, he thought, from the dignity of his wrath, to have appointed a man for the execution of his friend. Private cruelties, it is true, cannot do much mischief, but in princes they are a war against mankind. C. Cæsar would commonly, for exercise and pleasure, put senators and Roman knights to the torture; and whip several of them like slaves, or put them to death with the most acute torments, merely for the satisfaction of his cruelty. That Cæsar that “wished the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might cut it off at one blow;”—it was the employment, the study, and the joy of his life. He would not so much as give the expiring leave to groan, but caused their mouths to be stopped with sponges, or for want of them, with rags of their own clothes, that they might not breathe out so much as their last agonies at liberty; or, perhaps, lest the tormented should speak something which the tormentor had no mind to hear. Nay, he was so impatient of delay, that he would frequently rise from supper to have men killed by torch-light, as if his life and death had depended upon their dispatch before the next morning; to say nothing how many fathers were put to death in the same night with their sons (which was a kind of mercy in the prevention of their mourning). And was not Sylla’s cruelty prodigious too, which was only stopped for want of enemies? He caused seven thousand citizens of Rome to be slaughtered at once; and some of the senators being startled at their cries that were heard in the senate-house, “Let us mind our business,” says Sylla; “this is nothing but a few mutineers that I have ordered to be sent out of the way.” A glorious spectacle! says Hannibal, when he saw the trenches flowing with human blood; and if the rivers had run blood too, he would have liked it so much the better. Among the famous and detestable speeches that are committed to memory, I know none worse than that impudent and tyrannical maxim, “Let them hate me, so they fear me;” not considering that those that are kept in obedience by fear, are both malicious and mercenary, and only wait for an opportunity to change their master. Beside that, whosoever is terrible to others is likewise afraid of himself. What is more ordinary than for a tyrant to be destroyed by his own guards? which is no more than the putting those crimes into practice which they learned of their masters. How many slaves have revenged themselves of their cruel oppressors, though they were sure to die for it! but when it comes once to a popular tyranny, whole nations conspire against it. For “whosoever threatens all, is in danger of all,” over and above, that the cruelty of the prince increases the number of his enemies, by destroying some of them; for it entails an hereditary hatred upon the friends and relations of those that are taken away. And then it has this misfortune, that a man must be wicked upon necessity; for there is no going back; so that he must betake himself to arms, and yet he lives in fear. He can neither trust to the faith of his friends, nor to the piety of his children; he both dreads death and wishes it; and becomes a greater terror to himself than he is to his people. Nay, if there were nothing else to make cruelty detestable, it were enough that it passes all bounds, both of custom and humanity; and is followed upon the heel with sword or poison. A private malice indeed does not move whole cities; but that which extends to all is every body’s mark. One sick person gives no great disturbance in a family; but when it comes to a depopulating plague, all people fly from it. And why should a prince expect any man to be good whom he has taught to be wicked? But what if it were safe to be cruel? Were it not still a sad thing, the very state of such a government? A government that bears the image of a taken city, where there is nothing but sorrow, trouble, and confusion. Men dare not so much as trust themselves with their friends or with their pleasures. There is not any entertainment so innocent but it affords pretence of crime and danger. People are betrayed at their tables and in their cups, and drawn from the very theatre to the prison. How horrid a madness is it to be still raging and killing; to have the rattling of chains always in our ears; bloody spectacles before our eyes; and to carry terror and dismay wherever we go! If we had lions and serpents, to rule over us, this would be the manner of their government, saving that they agree better among themselves. It passes for a mark of greatness to burn cities, and lay whole kingdoms waste; nor is it for the honor of a prince, to appoint this or that single man to be killed, unless they have whole troops, or (sometimes) legions, to work upon. But it is not the spoils of war and bloody trophies that make a prince glorious, but the divine power of preserving unity and peace. Ruin without distinction is more properly the business of a general deluge, or a conflagration. Neither does a fierce and inexorable anger become the supreme magistrate; “Greatness of mind is always meek and humble; but cruelty is a note and an effect of weakness, and brings down a governor to the level of a competitor.”  SENECA OF CLEMENCY. The humanity and excellence of this virtue is confessed at all hands, as well by the men of pleasure, and those that think every man was made for himself, as by the Stoics, that make “man a sociable creature, and born for the common good of mankind:” for it is of all dispositions the most peaceable and quiet. But before we enter any farther upon the discourse, it should be first known what clemency is, that we may distinguish it from pity; which is a weakness, though many times mistaken for a virtue: and the next thing will be, to bring the mind to the habit and exercise of it. “Clemency is a favorable disposition of the mind, in the matter of inflicting punishment; or, a moderation that remits somewhat of the penalty incurred; as pardon is the total remission of a deserved punishment.” We must be careful not to confound clemency with pity; for as religion worships God, and superstition profanes that worship; so should we distinguish betwixt clemency and pity; practicing the one, and avoiding the other. For pity proceeds from a narrowness of mind, that respects rather the fortune than the cause. It is a kind of moral sickness, contracted from other people’s misfortune: such another weakness as laughing or yawning for company, or as that of sick eyes that cannot look upon others that are bleared without dropping themselves. I will give a shipwrecked man a plank, a lodging to a stranger, or a piece of money to him that wants it: I will dry up the tears of my friend, yet I will not weep with him, but treat him with constancy and humanity, as one man ought to treat another. It is objected by some, that clemency is an insignificant virtue; and that only the bad are the better for it, for the good have no need of it. But in the first place, as physic is in use only among the sick, and yet in honor with the sound, so the innocent have a reverence for clemency, though criminals are properly the objects of it. And then again, a man may be innocent, and yet have occasion for it too; for by the accidents of fortune, or the condition of times, virtue itself may come to be in danger. Consider the most populous city or nation; what a solitude would it be if none should be left there but those that could stand the test of a severe justice! We should have neither judges nor accusers; none either to grant a pardon or to ask it. More or less, we are all sinners; and he that has best purged his conscience, was brought by errors to repentance. And it is farther profitable to mankind; for many delinquents come to be converted. There is a tenderness to be used even toward our slaves, and those that we have bought with our money: how much more then to free and to honest men, that are rather under our protection than dominion! Not that I would have it so general neither as not to distinguish betwixt the good and the bad; for that would introduce a confusion, and give a kind of encouragement to wickedness. It must therefore have a respect to the quality of the offender, and separate the curable from the desperate; for it is an equal cruelty to pardon all and to pardon none. Where the matter is in balance, let mercy turn the scale: if all wicked men should be punished, who should escape? Though mercy and gentleness of nature keeps all in peace and tranquillity, even in a cottage; yet it is much more beneficial and conspicuous in a palace. Private men in their condition are likewise private in their virtues and in their vices; but the words and the actions of princes are the subject of public rumor; and therefore they had need have a care, what occasion they give people for discourse, of whom people will be always a talking. There is the government of a prince over his people, a father over his children, a master over his scholars, an officer over his soldiers. He is an unnatural father, that for every trifle beats his children. Who is the better master, he that rages over his scholars for but missing a word in a lesson, or he that tries, by admonition and fair words, to instruct and reform them? An outrageous officer makes his men run from their colors. A skilful rider brings his horse to obedience by mingling fair means with foul; whereas to be perpetually switching and spurring, makes him vicious and jadish: and shall we not have more care of men than of beasts? It breaks the hope of generous inclinations, when they are depressed by servility and terror. There is no creature so hard to be pleased with ill usage as man. Clemency does well with all but best with princes; for it makes their power comfortable and beneficial, which would otherwise be the pest of mankind. It establishes their greatness, when they make the good of the public their particular care, and employ their power for the safety of the people. The prince, in effect, is but the soul of the community, as the community is only the body of the prince; so that being merciful to others, he is tender of himself: nor is any man so mean but his master feels the loss of him, as a part of his empire: and he takes care not only of the lives of his people, but also of their reputation. Now, giving for granted that all virtues are in themselves equal, it will not yet be denied, that they may be more beneficial to mankind in one person than in another. A beggar may be as magnanimous as a king: for what can be greater or braver than to baffle ill fortune? This does not hinder but that a man in authority and plenty has more matter for his generosity to work upon than a private person; and it is also more taken notice of upon the bench than upon the level. When a gracious prince shows himself to his people, they do not fly from him as from a tiger that rouses himself out of his den, but they worship him as a benevolent influence; they secure him against all conspiracies, and interpose their bodies betwixt him and danger. They guard him while he sleeps, and defend him in the field against his enemies. Nor is it without reason, this unanimous agreement in love and loyalty, and this heroical zeal of abandoning themselves for the safety of their prince; but it is as well the interest of the people. In the breath of a prince there is life and death; and his sentence stands good, right or wrong. If he be angry, nobody dares advise him; and if he does amiss, who shall call him to account? Now, for him that has so much mischief in his power, and yet applies that power to the common utility and comfort of his people, diffusing also clemency and goodness into their hearts too, what can be a greater blessing to mankind than such a prince? Any man may kill another against the law, but only a prince can save him so. Let him so deal with his own subjects as he desires God should deal with him. If Heaven should be inexorable to sinners, and destroy all without mercy, what flesh could be safe? But as the faults of great men are not presently punished with thunder from above, let them have a like regard to their inferiors here upon earth. He that has revenge in his power, and does not use it, is the great man. Which is the more beautiful and agreeable state, that of a calm, a temperate, and a clear day; or that of lightning, thunder, and tempests? and this is the very difference betwixt a moderate and turbulent government. It is for low and vulgar spirits to brawl, storm, and transport themselves: but it is not for the majesty of a prince to lash out into intemperance of words. Some will think it rather slavery than empire to be debarred liberty of speech: and what if it be, when government itself is but a more illustrious servitude? He that uses his power as he should, takes as much delight in making it comfortable to his people as glorious to himself. He is affable and easy of access; his very countenance makes him the joy of his people’s eyes, and the delight of mankind. He is beloved, defended, and reverenced by all his subjects; and men speak as well of him in private as in public. He is safe without guards, and the sword is rather his ornament than his defence. In his duty, he is like that of a good father, that sometimes gently reproves a son, sometimes threatens him; nay, and perhaps corrects him: but no father in his right wits will disinherit a son for the first fault; there must be many and great offences, and only desperate consequences, that should bring him to that decretory resolution. He will make many experiments to try if he can reclaim him first, and nothing but the utmost despair must put him upon extremities. It is not flattery that calls a prince the father of his country; the titles of great and august are matter of compliment and of honor; but in calling him father, we mind him of that moderation and indulgence which he owes to his children. His subjects are his members; where, if there must be an amputation, let him come slowly to it; and when the part is cut off, let him wish it were on again: let him grieve in the doing of it. He that passes a sentence hastily, looks as if he did it willingly; and then there is an injustice in the excess. It is a glorious contemplation for a prince, first to consider the vast multitudes of his people, whose seditious, divided, and impotent passions, would cast all in confusion, and destroy themselves, and public order too, if the hand of government did not restrain them; and thence to pass the examination of his conscience, saying thus to himself, “It is by the choice of Providence that I am here made God’s deputy upon earth, the arbitrator of life and death; and that upon my breath depends the fortune of my people. My lips are the oracles of their fate, and upon them hangs the destiny both of cities and of men. It is under my favor that people seek either for prosperity or protection: thousands of swords are drawn or sheathed at my pleasure. What towns shall be advanced or destroyed; who shall be slaves, or who free, depends upon my will; and yet, in this arbitrary power of acting without control, I was never transported to do any cruel thing, either by anger or hot blood in myself or by the contumacy, rashness, or provocations of other men; though sufficient to turn mercy itself into fury. I was never moved by the odious vanity of making myself terrible by my power, (that accursed, though common humor of ostentation and glory that haunts imperious natures.) My sword has not only been buried in the scabbard, but in a manner bound to the peace, and tender even of the cheapest blood: and where I find no other motive to compassion, humanity itself is sufficient. I have been always slow to severity, and prone to forgive; and under as strict a guard to observe the laws as if I were accountable for the breaking of them. Some I pardoned for their youth, others for their age. I spare one man for his dignity, another for his humility; and when I find no other matter to work upon, I spare myself. So that if God should at this instant call me to an account, the whole world agree to witness for me, that I have not by any force, either public or private, either by myself or by any other, defrauded the commonwealth; and the reputation that I have ever sought for has been that which few princes have obtained, the conscience of my proper innocence. And I have not lost my labor neither; for no man was ever so dear to another, as I have made myself to the whole body of my people.” Under such a prince the subjects have nothing to wish for beyond what they enjoy; their fears are quieted, and their prayers heard, and there is nothing can make their felicity greater, unless to make it perpetual; and there is no liberty denied to the people but that of destroying one another. It is the interest of the people, by the consent of all nations, to run all hazards for the safety of their prince, and by a thousand deaths to redeem that one life, upon which so many millions depend. Does not the whole body serve the mind, though only the one is exposed to the eye and the other not, but thin and invisible, the very seat of it being uncertain? Yet the hands, feet, and eyes, observe the motions of it. We lie down, run about and ramble, as that commands us. If we be covetous, we fish the seas and ransack the earth for treasure: if ambitious, we burn our own flesh with Scævola; we cast ourselves into the gulf with Curtius: so would that vast multitude of people, which is animated but with one soul, governed by one spirit, and moved by one reason, destroy itself with its own strength, if it were not supported by wisdom and government. Wherefore, it is for their own security that the people expose their lives for their prince, as the very bond that ties the republic together; the vital spirit of so many thousands, which would be nothing else but a burden and prey without a governor. When this union comes once to be dissolved, all falls to pieces; for empire and obedience must stand and fall together. It is no wonder then if a prince be dear to his people, when the community is wrapt up in him, and the good of both as inseparable as the body and the head; the one for strength, and the other for counsel; for what signifies the force of the body without the direction of the understanding? While the prince watches, his people sleep; his labor keeps them at ease, and his business keeps them quiet. The natural intent of monarchy appears even from the very discipline of bees: they assign to their master the fairest lodgings, the safest place; and his office is only to see that the rest perform their duties. When their king is lost, the whole swarm dissolve: more than one they will not admit; and then they contend who shall have the best. They are of all creatures the fiercest for their bigness; and leave their stings behind them in their quarrels; only the king himself has none, intimating that kings should neither be vindictive nor cruel. Is it not a shame, after such an example of moderation in these creatures, that men should be yet intemperate? It were well if they lost their stings too in their revenge, as well as the other, that they might hurt but once, and do no mischief by their proxies. It would tire them out, if either they were to execute all with their own hands, or to wound others at the peril of their own lives. A prince should behave himself generously in the power which God has given him of life and death, especially towards those that have been at any time his equals; for the one has his revenge, and the other his punishment in it. He that stands indebted for his life has lost it; but he that receives his life at the foot of his enemy, lives to the honor of his preserver: he lives the lasting monument of his virtue; whereas, if he had been led in triumph, the spectacle would have been quickly over. Or what if he should restore him to his kingdom again? would it not be an ample accession to his honor to show that he found nothing about the conquered that was worthy of the conqueror? There is nothing more venerable than a prince that does not revenge an injury. He that is gracious is beloved and reverenced as a common father; but a tyrant stands in fear and in danger even of his own guards. No prince can be safe himself of whom all others are afraid; for to spare none is to enrage all. It is an error to imagine that any man can be secure that suffers nobody else to be so too. How can any man endure to lead an uneasy, suspicious, anxious life, when he may be safe if he please, and enjoy all the blessings of power, together with the prayers of his people? Clemency protects a prince without a guard; there is no need of troops, castles, or fortifications: security on the one side is the condition of security on the other; and the affections of the subject are the most invincible fortress. What can be fairer, than for a prince to live the object of his people’s love; to have the vows of their heart as well as of their lips, and his health and sickness their common hopes and fears? There will be no danger of plots; nay, on the contrary, who would not frankly venture his blood to save him, under whose government, justice, peace, modesty, and dignity flourish? under whose influence men grow rich and happy; and whom men look upon with such veneration, as they would do upon the immortal gods, if they were capable of seeing them? And as the true representative of the Almighty they consider him, when he is gracious and bountiful, and employs his power to the advantage of his subjects. When a prince proceeds to punishment, it must be either to vindicate himself or others. It is a hard matter to govern himself in his own case. If a man should advise him not to be credulous, but to examine matters, and indulge the innocent, this is rather a point of justice than of clemency: but in case that he be manifestly injured, I would have him forgive, where he may safely do it: and be tender even where he cannot forgive; but far more exorable in his own case, however, than in another’s. It is nothing to be free of another man’s purse, and it is as little to be merciful in another man’s cause. He is the great man that masters his passion where he is stung himself, and pardons when he might destroy. The end of punishment is either to comfort the party injured, or to secure him for the future. A prince’s fortune is above the need of such a comfort, and his power is too eminent to seek an advance of reputation by doing a private man a mischief. This I speak in case of an affront from those that are below us; but he that of an equal has made any man his inferior, has his revenge in the bringing of him down. A prince has been killed by a servant, destroyed by a serpent: but whosoever preserves a man must be greater than the person that he preserves. With citizens, strangers, and people of low condition, a prince is not to contend, for they are beneath him: he may spare some out of good will, and others as he would do some little creatures that a man cannot touch without fouling his fingers: but for those that are to be pardoned or exposed to public punishment, he may use mercy as he sees occasion; and a generous mind can never want inducements and motives to it; and whether it be age or sex, high or low, nothing comes amiss. To pass now to the vindication of others, there must be had a regard either to the amendment of the person punished, or the making others better for fear of punishment, or the taking the offender out of the way for the security of others. An amendment may be procured by a small punishment, for he lives more carefully that has something yet to lose—it is a kind of impunity to be incapable of a farther punishment. The corruptions of a city are best cured by a few and sparing severities; for the multitude of offenders creates a custom of offending, and company authorizes a crime, and there is more good to be done upon a dissolute age by patience than by rigor; provided that it pass not for an approbation of ill-manners, but only as an unwillingness to proceed to extremities. Under a merciful prince, a man will be ashamed to offend, because a punishment that is inflicted by a gentle governor seems to fall heavier and with more reproach: and it is remarkable also, that “those sins are often committed which are very often punished.” Caligula, in five years, condemned more people to the sack than ever were before him: and there were “fewer parricides before the law against them than after;” for our ancestors did wisely presume that the crime would never be committed, until by law for punishing it, they found that it might be done. Parricides began with the law against them, and the punishment instructed men in the crime. Where there are few punishments, innocency is indulged as a public good, and it is a dangerous thing to show a city how strong it is in delinquents. There is a certain contumacy in the nature of man that makes him oppose difficulties. We are better to follow than to drive; as a generous horse rides best with an easy bit. People obey willingly where they are commanded kindly. When Burrhus the prefect was to sentence two malefactors, he brought the warrant to Nero to sign; who, after a long reluctancy came to it at last with this exclamation: “I would I could not write!” A speech that deserved the whole world for an auditory, but all princes especially; and that the hearts of all the subjects would conform to the likeness of their masters. As the head is well or ill, so is the mind dull or merry. What is the difference betwixt a king and a tyrant, but a diversity of will under one and the same power. The one destroys for his pleasure, the other upon necessity; a distinction rather in fact than in name. A gracious prince is armed as well as a tyrant; but it is for the defence of his people and not for the ruin of them. No king can ever have faithful servants that accustoms them to tortures and executions; the very guilty themselves do not lead so anxious a life as the persecutors: for they are not only afraid of justice, both divine and human, but it is dangerous for them to mend their manners; so that when they are once in, they must continue to be wicked upon necessity. An universal hatred unites in a popular rage. A temperate fear may be kept in order; but when it comes once to be continual and sharp, it provokes people to extremities, and transports them to desperate resolutions, as wild beasts when they are pressed upon the toil, turn back and assault the very pursuers. A turbulent government is a perpetual trouble both to prince and people; and he that is a terror to all others is not without terror also himself. Frequent punishments and revenges may suppress the hatred of a few, but then it stirs up the detestation of all, so that there is no destroying one enemy without making many. It is good to master the will of being cruel, even while there may be cause for it, and matter to work upon. Augustus was a gracious prince when he had the power in his own hand; but in the triumviracy he made use of his sword, and had his friends ready armed to set upon Antony during that dispute. But he behaved himself afterwards at another rate; for when he was betwixt forty and fifty years of age he was told that Cinna was in a plot to murder him, with the time, place and manner of the design; and this from one of the confederates. Upon this he resolved upon a revenge, and sent for several of his friends to advise upon it. The thought of it kept him waking, to consider, that there was the life of a young nobleman in the case, the nephew of Pompey, and a person otherwise innocent. He was off and on several times whether he should put him to death or not. “What!” says he, “shall I live in trouble and in danger myself, and the contriver of my death walk free and secure? Will nothing serve him but that life which Providence has preserved in so many civil wars—in so many battles both by sea and land; and now in the state of an universal peace too—and not a simple murder either, but a sacrifice; for I am to be assaulted at the very altar—and shall the contriver of all this villainy escape unpunished?” Here Augustus made a little pause, and then recollecting himself: “No, no, Cæsar,” says he, “it is rather Cæsar than Cinna that I am to be angry with: why do I myself live any longer after that my death is become the interest of so many people? And if I go on, what end will there be of blood and of punishment? If it be against my life that the nobility arm itself, and level its weapons, my single life is not worth the while, if so many must be destroyed that I may be preserved.” His wife Livia gave him here an interruption, and desired him that he would for once hear a woman’s counsel. “Do,” says she, “like a physician, that when common remedies fail, will try the contrary: you have got nothing hitherto by severity—after Salvidianus there followed Lepidus—after him Muræna—Cæpio followed him, and Egnatius followed Cæpio—try now what mercy will do—forgive Cinna. He is discovered, and can do no hurt to your person; and it will yet advantage you in your reputation.” Augustus was glad of the advice, and he gave thanks for it; and thereupon countermanded the meeting of his friends, and ordered Cinna to be brought to him alone; for whom he caused a chair to be set, and then discharged the rest of the company. “Cinna,” says Augustus, “before I go any farther, you must promise not to give me the interruption of one syllable until I have told you all I have to say, and you shall have liberty afterwards to say what you please. You cannot forget, that when I found you in arms against me, and not only made my enemy, but born so, I gave you your life and fortune. Upon your petition for the priesthood, I granted it, with a repulse to the sons of those that had been my fellow-soldiers; and you are at this day so happy and so rich, that even the conquerors envy him that is overcome; and yet after all this, you are in a plot, Cinna, to murder me.” At that word Cinna started, and interposed with exclamations, “that certainly he was far from being either so wicked or so mad.” “This is a breach of conditions, Cinna,” says Augustus, “it is not your time to speak yet: I tell you again, that you are in a plot to murder me;” and so he told him the time, the place, the confederates, the order and manner of the design, and who it was that was to do the deed. Cinna, upon this, fixed his eye upon the ground without any reply: not for his word’s sake, but as in a confusion of conscience: and so Augustus went on. “What,” says he, “may your design be in all this? Is it that you would pretend to step into my place? The commonwealth were in an ill condition, if only Augustus were in the way betwixt you and the government. You were cast the other day in a cause by one of your own freemen, and do you expect to find a weaker adversary of Cæsar? But what if I were removed? There is Æmilius Paulus, Fabius Maximus, and twenty other families of great blood and interest, that would never bear it.” To cut off the story short; (for it was a discourse of above two hours; and Augustus lengthened the punishment in words, since he intended that should be all;) “Well, Cinna,” says he, “the life that I gave to you once as an enemy, I will now repeat it to a traitor and to a parricide, and this shall be the last reproach I will give you. For the time to come there shall be no other contention betwixt you and me, than which shall outdo the other in point of friendship.” After this Augustus made Cinna consul, (an honor which he confessed he durst not so much as desire) and Cinna was ever affectionately faithful to him: he made Cæsar his sole heir; and this was the last conspiracy that ever was formed against him. This moderation of Augustus was the excellency of his mature age; for in his youth he was passionate and sudden; and he did many things which afterward he looked back upon with trouble: after the battle of Actium, so many navies broken in Sicily, both Roman and strangers: the Perusian altars, where  lives were sacrificed to the ghost of Julius; his frequent proscriptions, and other severities; his temperance at last seemed to be little more than a weary cruelty. If he had not forgiven those that he conquered, whom should he have governed? He chose his very life-guard from among his enemies, and the flower of the Romans owed their lives to his clemency. Nay, he only punished Lepidus himself with banishment, and permitted him to wear the ensigns of his dignity, without taking the pontificate to himself so long as Lepidus was living; for he would not possess it as a spoil, but as an honor. This clemency it was that secured him in his greatness, and ingratiated him to the people, though he laid his hand upon the government before they had thoroughly submitted to the yoke; and this clemency it was that made his name famous to posterity. This is it that makes us reckon him divine without the authority of an apotheosis. He was so tender and patient, that though many a bitter jest was broken upon him, (and contumelies upon princes are the most intolerable of all injuries) yet he never punished any man upon that subject. It is, then, generous to be merciful, when we have it in our power to take revenge. A son of Titus Arius, being examined and found guilty of parricide, was banished Rome, and confined to Marseilles, where his father allowed him the same annuity that he had before; which made all people conclude him guilty, when they saw that his father had yet condemned the son that he could not hate. Augustus was pleased to sit upon the fact in the house of Arius, only as a single member of the council that was to examine it: if it had been in Cæsar’s palace, the judgment must have been Cæsar’s and not the father’s. Upon a full hearing of the matter, Cæsar directed that every man should write his opinion whether guilty or not, and without declaring of his own, for fear of a partial vote. Before the opening of the books, Cæsar passed an oath, that he would not be Arius’s heir: and to show that he had no interest in his sentence, as appeared afterward; for he was not condemned to the ordinary punishments of parricides, nor to a prison, but, by the mediation of Cæsar, only banished Rome, and confined to the place which his father should name; Augustus insisting upon it, that the father should content himself with an easy punishment: and arguing that the young man was not moved to the attempt by malice, and that he was but half resolved upon the fact, for he wavered in it; and, therefore, to remove him from the city, and from his father’s sight, would be sufficient. This is a glorious mercy, and worthy of a prince, to make all things gentler wherever he comes. How miserable is that man in himself, who, when he has employed his power in rapines and cruelty upon others, is yet more unhappy in himself! He stands in fear both of his domestics and of strangers; the faith of his friends and the piety of his children, and flies to actual violence to secure him from the violence he fears. When he comes to look about him, and to consider what he has done, what he must, and what he is about to do; what with the wickedness, and with the torments of his conscience, many times he fears death, oftener he wishes for it; and lives more odious to himself than to his subjects; whereas on the contrary, he that takes a care of the public, though of one part more perhaps than of another, yet there is not any part of it but he looks upon as part of himself. His mind is tender and gentle; and even where punishment is necessary and profitable, he comes to it unwillingly, and without any rancor or enmity in his heart. Let the authority, in fine, be what it will, clemency becomes it; and the greater the power, the greater is the glory of it. “It is a truly royal virtue for a prince to deliver his people from other men’s anger, and not to oppress them with his own.”
There is not any thing in this world, perhaps, that is more talked of, and less understood, than the business of a happy life. It is every man’s wish and design; and yet not one of a thousand that knows wherein that happiness consists. We live, however, in a blind and eager pursuit of it; and the more haste we make in a wrong way, the further we are from our journey’s end. Let us therefore, first, consider “what it is we should be at;” and, secondly, “which is the readiest way to compass it.” If we be right, we shall find every day how much we improve; but if we either follow the cry, or the track, of people that are out of the way, we must expect to be misled, and to continue our days in wandering in error. Wherefore, it highly concerns us to take along with us a skilful guide; for it is not in this, as in other voyages, where the highway brings us to our place of repose; or if a man should happen to be out, where the inhabitants might set him right again: but on the contrary, the beaten road is here the most dangerous, and the people, instead of helping us, misguide us. Let us not therefore follow, like beasts, but rather govern ourselves by reason, than by example. It fares with us in human life as in a routed army; one stumbles first, and then another falls upon him, and so they follow, one upon the neck of another, until the whole field comes to be but one heap of miscarriages. And the mischief is, “that the number of the multitude carries it against truth and justice;” so that we must leave the crowd, if we would be happy: for the question of a happy life is not to be decided by vote: nay, so far from it, that plurality of voices is still an argument of the wrong; the common people find it easier to believe than to judge, and content themselves with what is usual, never examining whether it be good or not. By the common people is intended the man of title as well as the clouted shoe: for I do not distinguish them by the eye, but by the mind, which is the proper judge of the man. Worldly felicity, I know, makes the head giddy; but if ever a man comes to himself again, he will confess, that “whatsoever he has done, he wishes undone;” and that “the things he feared were better than those he prayed for.” The true felicity of life is to be free from perturbations, to understand our duties towards God and man: to enjoy the present without any anxious dependence upon the future. Not to amuse ourselves with either hopes or fears, but to rest satisfied with what we have, which is abundantly sufficient; for he that is so, wants nothing. The great blessings of mankind are within us, and within our reach; but we shut our eyes, and, like people in the dark, we fall foul upon the very thing which we search for without finding it. “Tranquillity is a certain equality of mind, which no condition of fortune can either exalt or depress.” Nothing can make it less: for it is the state of human perfection: it raises us as high as we can go; and makes every man his own supporter; whereas he that is borne up by any thing else may fall. He that judges aright, and perseveres in it, enjoys a perpetual calm: he takes a true prospect of things; he observes an order, measure, a decorum in all his actions; he has a benevolence in his nature; he squares his life according to reason; and draws to himself love and admiration. Without a certain and an unchangeable judgment, all the rest is but fluctuation: but “he that always wills and nills the same thing, is undoubtedly in the right.” Liberty and serenity of mind must necessarily ensue upon the mastering of those things which either allure or affright us; when instead of those flashy pleasures, (which even at the best are both vain and hurtful together,) we shall find ourselves possessed of joy transporting and everlasting. It must be a sound mind that makes a happy man; there must be a constancy in all conditions, a care for the things of this world, but without trouble; and such an indifferency for the bounties of fortune, that either with them, or without them, we may live contentedly. There must be neither lamentation, nor quarrelling, nor sloth, nor fear; for it makes a discord in a man’s life. “He that fears, serves.” The joy of a wise man stands firm without interruption; in all places, at all times, and in all conditions, his thoughts are cheerful and quiet. As it never came in to him from without, so it will never leave him; but it is born within him, and inseparable from him. It is a solicitous life that is egged on with the hope of any thing, though never so open and easy, nay, though a man should never suffer any sort of disappointment. I do not speak this either as a bar to the fair enjoyment of lawful pleasures, or to the gentle flatteries of reasonable expectations: but, on the contrary, I would have men to be always in good humor, provided that it arises from their own souls, and be cherished in their own breasts. Other delights are trivial; they may smooth the brow, but they do not fill and affect the heart. “True joy is a serene and sober motion;” and they are miserably out that take laughing for rejoicing. The seat of it is within, and there is no cheerfulness like the resolution of a brave mind, that has fortune under his feet. He that can look death in the face, and bid it welcome; open his door to poverty, and bridle his appetites; this is the man whom Providence has established in the possession of inviolable delights. The pleasures of the vulgar are ungrounded, thin, and superficial; but the others are solid and eternal. As the body itself is rather a necessary thing, than a great; so the comforts of it are but temporary and vain; beside that, without extraordinary moderation, their end is only pain and repentance; whereas a peaceful conscience, honest thoughts, virtuous actions, and an indifference for casual events, are blessings without end, satiety, or measure. This consummated state of felicity is only a submission to the dictate of right nature; “The foundation of it is wisdom and virtue; the knowledge of what we ought to do, and the conformity of the will to that knowledge.”   HUMAN HAPPINESS IS FOUNDED UPON WISDOM AND VIRTUE; AND FIRST, OF WISDOM. Taking for granted that human happiness is founded upon wisdom and virtue we shall treat of these two points in order as they lie: and, first, of wisdom; not in the latitude of its various operations but as it has only a regard to good life, and the happiness of mankind. Wisdom is a right understanding, a faculty of discerning good from evil; what is to be chosen, and what rejected; a judgment grounded upon the value of things, and not the common opinion of them; an equality of force, and a strength of resolution. It sets a watch over our words and deeds, it takes us up with the contemplation of the works of nature, and makes us invincible by either good or evil fortune. It is large and spacious, and requires a great deal of room to work in; it ransacks heaven and earth; it has for its object things past and to come, transitory and eternal. It examines all the circumstances of time; “what it is, when it began, and how long it will continue: and so for the mind; whence it came; what it is; when it begins; how long it lasts; whether or not it passes from one form to another, or serves only one and wanders when it leaves us; whether it abides in a state of separation, and what the action of it; what use it makes of its liberty; whether or not it retains the memory of things past, and comes to the knowledge of itself.” It is the habit of a perfect mind, and the perfection of humanity, raised as high as Nature can carry it. It differs from philosophy, as avarice and money; the one desires, and the other is desired; the one is the effect and the reward of the other. To be wise is the use of wisdom, as seeing is the use of eyes, and well-speaking the use of eloquence. He that is perfectly wise is perfectly happy; nay, the very beginning of wisdom makes life easy to us. Neither is it enough to know this, unless we print it in our minds by daily meditation, and so bring a good-will to a good habit. And we must practice what we preach: for philosophy is not a subject for popular ostentation; nor does it rest in words, but in things. It is not an entertainment taken up for delight, or to give a taste to our leisure; but it fashions the mind, governs our actions, tells us what we are to do, and what not. It sits at the helm, and guides us through all hazards; nay, we cannot be safe without it, for every hour gives us occasion to make use of it. It informs us in all duties of life, piety to our parents, faith to our friends, charity to the miserable, judgment in counsel; it gives us peace by fearing nothing, and riches by coveting nothing. There is no condition of life that excludes a wise man from discharging his duty. If his fortune be good, he tempers it; if bad, he masters it; if he has an estate, he will exercise his virtue in plenty; if none, in poverty: if he cannot do it in his country, he will do it in banishment; if he has no command, he will do the office of a common soldier. Some people have the skill of reclaiming the fiercest of beasts; they will make a lion embrace his keeper, a tiger kiss him, and an elephant kneel to him. This is the case of a wise man in the extremest difficulties; let them be never so terrible in themselves, when they come to him once, they are perfectly tame. They that ascribe the invention of tillage, architecture, navigation, etc., to wise men, may perchance be in the right, that they were invented by wise men, as wise men; for wisdom does not teach our fingers, but our minds: fiddling and dancing, arms and fortifications, were the works of luxury and discord; but wisdom instructs us in the way of nature, and in the arts of unity and concord, not in the instruments, but in the government of life; not to make us live only, but to live happily. She teaches us what things are good, what evil, and what only appear so; and to distinguish betwixt true greatness and tumor. She clears our minds of dross and vanity; she raises up our thoughts to heaven, and carries them down to hell: she discourses of the nature of the soul, the powers and faculties of it; the first principles of things; the order of Providence: she exalts us from things corporeal to things incorporeal, and retrieves the truth of all: she searches nature, gives laws to life; and tells us, “That it is not enough to God, unless we obey him:” she looks upon all accidents as acts of Providence: sets a true value upon things; delivers us from false opinions, and condemns all pleasures that are attended with repentance. She allows nothing to be good that will not be so forever; no man to be happy but that needs no other happiness than what he has within himself. This is the felicity of human life; a felicity that can neither be corrupted nor extinguished: it inquires into the nature of the heavens, the influence of the stars; how far they operate upon our minds and bodies: which thoughts, though they do not form our manners, they do yet raise and dispose us for glorious things. It is agreed upon all hands that “right reason is the perfection of human nature,” and wisdom only the dictate of it. The greatness that arises from it is solid and unmovable, the resolutions of wisdom being free, absolute and constant; whereas folly is never long pleased with the same thing, but still shifting of counsels and sick of itself. There can be no happiness without constancy and prudence, for a wise man is to write without a blot, and what he likes once he approves for ever. He admits of nothing that is either evil or slippery, but marches without staggering or stumbling, and is never surprised; he lives always true and steady to himself, and whatsoever befalls him, this great artificer of both fortunes turns to advantage; he that demurs and hesitates is not yet composed; but wheresoever virtue interposes upon the main, there must be concord and consent in the parts; for all virtues are in agreement, as well as all vices are at variance. A wise man, in what condition soever he is will be still happy, for he subjects all things to himself, because he submits himself to reason, and governs his actions by council, not by passion. He is not moved with the utmost violence of fortune, nor with the extremities of fire and sword; whereas a fool is afraid of his own shadow, and surprised at ill accidents, as if they were all levelled at him. He does nothing unwillingly, for whatever he finds necessary, he makes it his choice. He propounds to himself the certain scope and end of human life: he follows that which conduces to it, and avoids that which hinders it. He is content with his lot whatever it be, without wishing what he has not, though, of the two, he had rather abound than want. The great business of his life like that of nature, is performed without tumult or noise. He neither fears danger or provokes it, but it is his caution, not any want of courage—for captivity, wounds and chains, he only looks upon as false and lymphatic terrors. He does not pretend to go through with whatever he undertakes, but to do that well which he does. Arts are but the servants—wisdom commands—and where the matter fails it is none of the workman’s fault. He is cautelous in doubtful cases, in prosperity temperate, and resolute in adversity, still making the best of every condition and improving all occasions to make them serviceable to his fate. Some accidents there are, which I confess may affect him, but not overthrow him, as bodily pains, loss of children and friends, the ruin and desolation of a man’s country. One must be made of stone or iron, not to be sensible of these calamities; and, beside, it were no virtue to bear them, if a body did not feel them. There are three degrees of proficients in the school of wisdom. The first are those that come within sight of it, but not up to it—they have learned what they ought to do, but they have not put their knowledge in practice—they are past the hazard of a relapse, but they have still the grudges of a disease, though they are out of the danger of it. By a disease I do understand an obstinacy in evil, or an ill habit, that makes us over eager upon things which are either not much to be desired, or not at all. A second sort are those that have subjected their appetites for a season, but are yet in fear of falling back. A third sort are those that are clear of many vices but not of all. They are not covetous, but perhaps they are choleric—nor lustful, but perchance ambitious; they are firm enough in some cases but weak enough in others: there are many that despise death and yet shrink at pain. There are diversities in wise men, but no inequalities—one is more affable, another more ready, a third a better speaker; but the felicity of them all is equal. It is in this as in heavenly bodies, there is a certain state in greatness. In civil and domestic affairs, a wise man may stand in need of counsel, as of a physician, an advocate, a solicitor; but in greater matters, the blessing of wise men rests in the joy they take in the communication of their virtues. If there were nothing else in it, a man would apply himself to wisdom, because it settles him in a perfect tranquillity of mind.  . THERE CAN BE NO HAPPINESS WITHOUT VIRTUE. Virtue is that perfect good which is the complement of a happy life; the only immortal thing that belongs to mortality—it is the knowledge both of others and itself—it is an invincible greatness of mind, not to be elevated or dejected with good or ill fortune. It is sociable and gentle, free, steady, and fearless, content within itself, full of inexhaustible delights, and it is valued for itself. One may be a good physician, a good governor, a good grammarian, without being a good man, so that all things from without are only accessories, for the seat of it is a pure and holy mind. It consists in a congruity of actions which we can never expect so long as we are distracted by our passions: not but that a man may be allowed to change color and countenance, and suffer such impressions as are properly a kind of natural force upon the body, and not under the dominion of the mind; but all this while I will have his judgment firm, and he shall act steadily and boldly, without wavering betwixt the motions of his body and those of his mind. It is not a thing indifferent, I know, whether a man lies at ease upon a bed, or in torment upon a wheel—and yet the former may be the worse of the two if he suffer the latter with honor, and enjoy the other with infamy. It is not the matter, but the virtue, that makes the action good or ill; and he that is led in triumph may be yet greater than his conqueror. When we come once to value our flesh above our honesty we are lost: and yet I would not press upon dangers, no, not so much as upon inconveniences, unless where the man and the brute come in competition; and in such a case, rather than make a forfeiture of my credit, my reason, or my faith, I would run all extremities. They are great blessings to have tender parents, dutiful children, and to live under a just and well-ordered government. Now, would it not trouble even a virtuous man to see his children butchered before his eyes, his father made a slave, and his country overrun by a barbarous enemy? There is a great difference betwixt the simple loss of a blessing and the succeeding of a great mischief in the place of it, over and above. The loss of health is followed with sickness, and the loss of sight with blindness; but this does not hold in the loss of friends and children, where there is rather something to the contrary to supply that loss: that is to say, virtue, which fills the mind, and takes away the desire of what we have not. What matters it whether the water be stopped or not, so long as the fountain is safe? Is a man ever the wiser for a multitude of friends, or the more foolish for the loss of them? so neither is he the happier, nor the more miserable. Short life, grief and pain are accessions that have no effect at all upon virtue. It consists in the action and not in the things we do—in the choice itself, and not in the subject-matter of it. It is not a despicable body or condition, nor poverty, infamy or scandal, that can obscure the glories of virtue; but a man may see her through all oppositions: and he that looks diligently into the state of a wicked man will see the canker at his heart, through all the false and dazzling splendors of greatness and fortune. We shall then discover our childishness, in setting our hearts upon things trivial and contemptible, and in the selling of our very country and parents for a rattle. And what is the difference (in effect) betwixt old men and children, but that the one deals in paintings and statues, and the other in babies, so that we ourselves are only the more expensive fools. If one could but see the mind of a good man, as it is illustrated with virtue; the beauty and the majesty of it, which is a dignity not so much as to be thought of without love and veneration—would not a man bless himself at the sight of such an object as at the encounter of some supernatural power—a power so miraculous that it is a kind of charm upon the souls of those that are truly affected with it. There is so wonderful a grace and authority in it that even the worst of men approve it, and set up for the reputation of being accounted virtuous themselves. They covet the fruit indeed, and the profit of wickedness; but they hate and are ashamed of the imputation of it. It is by an impression of Nature that all men have a reverence for virtue—they know it and they have a respect for it though they do not practice it—nay, for the countenance of their very wickedness, they miscall it virtue. Their injuries they call benefits, and expect a man should thank them for doing him a mischief—they cover their most notorious iniquities with a pretext of justice.  He that robs upon the highway had rather find his booty than force it; ask any of them that live upon rapine, fraud, oppression, if they had not rather enjoy a fortune honestly gotten, and their consciences will not suffer them to deny it. Men are vicious only for the proof of villainy; for at the same time that they commit it they condemn it; nay, so powerful is virtue, and so gracious is Providence, that every man has a light set up within him for a guide, which we do, all of us, both see and acknowledge, though we do not pursue it. This it is that makes the prisoner upon the torture happier than the executioner, and sickness better than health, if we bear it without yielding or repining—this it is that overcomes ill-fortune and moderates good—for it marches betwixt the one and the other, with an equal contempt for both. It turns (like fire) all things into itself, our actions and our friendships are tinctured with it, and whatever it touches becomes amiable. That which is frail and mortal rises and falls, grows, wastes, and varies from itself; but the state of things divine is always the same; and so is virtue, let the matter be what it will. It is never the worse for the difficulty of the action, nor the better for the easiness of it. It is the same in a rich man as in a poor; in a sickly man as in a sound; in a strong as in a weak; the virtue of the besieged is as great as that of the besiegers. There are some virtues, I confess, which a good man cannot be without, and yet he had rather have no occasion to employ them. If there were any difference, I should prefer the virtues of patience before those of pleasure; for it is braver to break through difficulties than to temper our delights. But though the subject of virtue may possibly be against nature, as to be burnt or wounded, yet the virtue itself of an invincible patience is according to nature. We may seem, perhaps, to promise more than human nature is able to perform; but we speak with a respect to the mind, and not to the body. If a man does not live up to his own rules, it is something yet to have virtuous meditations and good purposes, even without acting; it is generous, the very adventure of being good, and the bare proposal of an eminent course of life, though beyond the force of human frailty to accomplish. There is something of honor yet in the miscarriage; nay, in the naked contemplation of it. I would receive my own death with as little trouble as I would hear of another man’s; I would bear the same mind whether I be rich or poor, whether I get or lose in the world; what I have, I will neither sordidly spare, or prodigally squander away, and I will reckon upon benefits well-placed as the fairest part of my possession: not valuing them by number or weight, but by the profit and esteem of the receiver; accounting myself never the poorer for that which I give to a worthy person. What I do shall be done for conscience, not ostentation. I will eat and drink, not to gratify my palate, or only to fill and empty, but to satisfy nature: I will be cheerful to my friends, mild and placable to my enemies: I will prevent an honest request if I can foresee it, and I will grant it without asking: I will look upon the whole world as my country, and upon the gods, both as the witnesses and the judges of my words and deeds. I will live and die with this testimony, that I loved good studies, and a good conscience; that I never invaded another man’s liberty; and that I preserved my own. I will govern my life and my thoughts as if the whole world were to see the one, and to read the other; for “what does it signify to make anything a secret to my neighbor, when to God (who is the searcher of our hearts) all our privacies are open?” Virtue is divided into two parts, contemplation and action. The one is delivered by institution, the other by admonition: one part of virtue consists in discipline, the other in exercise: for we must first learn, and then practice. The sooner we begin to apply ourselves to it, and the more haste we make, the longer shall we enjoy the comforts of a rectified mind; nay, we have the fruition of it in the very act of forming it: but it is another sort of delight, I must confess, that arises from a contemplation of a soul which is advanced into the possession of wisdom and virtue. If it was so great a comfort to us to pass from the subjection of our childhood into a state of liberty and business, how much greater will it be when we come to cast off the boyish levity of our minds, and range ourselves among the philosophers? We are past our minority, it is true, but not our indiscretions; and, which is yet worse, we have the authority of seniors, and the weaknesses of children, (I might have said of infants, for every little thing frights the one, and every trivial fancy the other.) Whoever studies this point well will find that many things are the less to be feared the more terrible they appear. To think anything good that is not honest, were to reproach Providence; for good men suffer many inconveniences; but virtue, like the sun, goes on still with her work, let the air be never so cloudy, and finishes her course, extinguishing likewise all other splendors and oppositions; insomuch that calamity is no more to a virtuous mind, than a shower into the sea. That which is right, is not to be valued by quantity, number, or time; a life of a day may be as honest as a life of a hundred years: but yet virtue in one man may have a larger field to show itself in than in another. One man, perhaps, may be in a station to administer unto cities and kingdoms; to contrive good laws, create friendships, and do beneficial offices to mankind. For virtue is open to all; as well to servants and exiles, as to princes: it is profitable to the world and to itself, at all distances and in all conditions; and there is no difficulty can excuse a man from the exercise of it; and it is only to be found in a wise man, though there may be some faint resemblances of it in the common people. The Stoics hold all virtues to be equal; but yet there is great variety in the matter they have to work upon, according as it is larger or narrower, illustrious or less noble, of more or less extent; as all good men are equal, that is to say, as they are good; but yet one may be young, another old; one may be rich, another poor; one eminent and powerful, another unknown and obscure. There are many things which have little or no grace in themselves, and are yet glorious and remarkable by virtue. Nothing can be good which gives neither greatness nor security to the mind; but, on the contrary, infects it with insolence, arrogance, and tumor: nor does virtue dwell upon the tip of the tongue, but in the temple of a purified heart. He that depends upon any other good becomes covetous of life, and what belongs to it; which exposes a man to appetites that are vast, unlimited, and intolerable. Virtue is free and indefatigable, and accompanied with concord and gracefulness; whereas pleasure is mean, servile, transitory, tiresome, and sickly and scarce outlives the tasting of it: it is the good of the belly, and not of the man; and only the felicity of brutes. Who does not know that fools enjoy their pleasures, and that there is great variety in the entertainments of wickedness? Nay, the mind itself has its variety of perverse pleasures as well as the body: as insolence, self-conceit, pride, garrulity, laziness, and the abusive wit of turning everything into ridicule, whereas virtue weighs all this, and corrects it. It is the knowledge both of others and of itself; it is to be learned from itself; and the very will itself may be taught; which will cannot be right, unless the whole habit of the mind be right from whence the will comes. It is by the impulse of virtue that we love virtue, so that the very way to virtue, lies by virtue, which takes in also, at a view, the laws of human life. Neither are we to value ourselves upon a day, or an hour, or any one action, but upon the whole habit of the mind. Some men do one thing bravely, but not another; they will shrink at infamy, and bear up against poverty: in this case, we commend the fact, and despise the man. The soul is never in the right place until it be delivered from the cares of human affairs; we must labor and climb the hill, if we will arrive at virtue, whose seat is upon the top of it. He that masters avarice, and is truly good, stands firm against ambition; he looks upon his last hour not as a punishment, but as the equity of a common fate; he that subdues his carnal lusts shall easily keep himself untainted with any other: so that reason does not encounter this or that vice by itself, but beats down all at a blow. What does he care for ignominy that only values himself upon conscience, and not opinion? Socrates looked a scandalous death in the face with the same constancy that he had before practiced towards the thirty tyrants: his virtue consecrated the very dungeon: as Cato’s repulse was Cato’s honor, and the reproach of the government. He that is wise will take delight even in an ill opinion that is well gotten; it is ostentation, not virtue, when a man will have his good deeds published; and it is not enough to be just where there is honor to be gotten, but to continue so, in defiance of infamy and danger. But virtue cannot lie hid, for the time will come that shall raise it again (even after it is buried) and deliver it from the malignity of the age that oppressed it: immortal glory is the shadow of it, and keeps it company whether we will or not; but sometimes the shadow goes before the substance, and other whiles it follows it; and the later it comes, the larger it is, when even envy itself shall have given way to it. It was a long time that Democritus was taken for a madman, and before Socrates had any esteem in the world. How long was it before Cato could be understood? Nay, he was affronted, contemned, and rejected; and the people never knew the value of him until they had lost him: the integrity and courage of mad Rutilius had been forgotten but for his sufferings. I speak of those that fortune has made famous for their persecutions: and there are others also that the world never took notice of until they were dead; as Epicurus and Metrodorus, that were almost wholly unknown, even in the place where they lived. Now, as the body is to be kept in upon the down-hill, and forced upwards, so there are some virtues that require the rein and others the spur. In liberality, temperance, gentleness of nature, we are to check ourselves for fear of falling; but in patience, resolutions, and perseverance, where we are to mount the hill, we stand in need of encouragement. Upon this division of the matter, I had rather steer the smoother course than pass through the experiments of sweat and blood: I know it is my duty to be content in all conditions; but yet, if it were at my election, I would choose the fairest. When a man comes once to stand in need of fortune, his life is anxious, suspicious, timorous, dependent upon every moment, and in fear of all accidents. How can that man resign himself to God, or bear his lot, whatever it be, without murmuring, and cheerfully submit to Providence, that shrinks at every motion of pleasure or pain? It is virtue alone that raises us above griefs, hopes, fears and chances; and makes us not only patient, but willing, as knowing that whatever we suffer is according to the decree of Heaven. He that is overcome with pleasure, (so contemptible and weak an enemy) what will become of him when he comes to grapple with dangers, necessities, torments, death, and the dissolution of nature itself? Wealth, honor, and favor, may come upon a man by chance; nay, they may be cast upon him without so much as looking after them: but virtue is the work of industry and labor; and certainly it is worth the while to purchase that good which brings all others along with it. A good man is happy within himself, and independent upon fortune: kind to his friend, temperate to his enemy, religiously just, indefatigably laborious; and he discharges all duties with a constancy and congruity of actions.   PHILOSOPHY IS THE GUIDE OF LIFE. If it be true, that the understanding and the will are the two eminent faculties of the reasonable soul, it follows necessarily, that wisdom and virtue, (which are the best improvements of these two faculties,) must be the perfection also of our reasonable being; and consequently, the undeniable foundation of a happy life. There is not any duty to which Providence has not annexed a blessing; nor any institution of Heaven which, even in this life, we may not be the better for; not any temptation, either of fortune or of appetite, that is not subject to our reason; nor any passion or affliction for which virtue has not provided a remedy. So that it is our own fault if we either fear or hope for anything; which two affections are the root of all our miseries. From this general prospect of the foundation of our tranquillity, we shall pass by degrees to a particular consideration of the means by which it may be procured, and of the impediments that obstruct it; beginning with that philosophy which principally regards our manners, and instructs us in the measures of a virtuous and quiet life. Philosophy is divided into moral, natural, and rational: the first concerns our manners; the second searches the works of Nature; and the third furnishes us with propriety of words and arguments, and the faculty of distinguishing, that we may not be imposed upon with tricks and fallacies. The causes of things fall under natural philosophy, arguments under rational, and actions under moral. Moral philosophy is again divided into matter of justice, which arises from the estimation of things and of men; and into affections and actions; and a failing in any one of these, disorders all the rest: for what does it profit us to know the true value of things, if we be transported by our passion? or to master our appetites without understanding the when, the what, the how, and other circumstances of our proceedings? For it is one thing to know the rate and dignity of things, and another to know the little nicks and springs of acting. Natural philosophy is conversant about things corporeal and incorporeal; the disquisition of causes and effects, and the contemplation of the cause of causes. Rational philosophy is divided into logic and rhetoric; the one looks after words, sense, and order; the other treats barely of words, and the significations of them. Socrates places all philosophy in morals; and wisdom in the distinguishing of good and evil. It is the art and law of life, and it teaches us what to do in all cases, and, like good marksmen, to hit the white at any distance. The force of it is incredible; for it gives us in the weakness of a man the security of a spirit: in sickness it is as good as a remedy to us; for whatsoever eases the mind is profitable also to the body. The physician may prescribe diet and exercise, and accommodate his rule and medicine to the disease, but it is philosophy that must bring us to a contempt of death, which is the remedy of all diseases. In poverty it gives us riches, or such a state of mind as makes them superfluous to us. It arms us against all difficulties: one man is pressed with death, another with poverty; some with envy, others are offended at Providence, and unsatisfied with the condition of mankind: but philosophy prompts us to relieve the prisoner, the infirm, the necessitous, the condemned; to show the ignorant their errors, and rectify their affections. It makes us inspect and govern our manners; it rouses us where we are faint and drowsy: it binds up what is loose, and humbles in us that which is contumacious: it delivers the mind from the bondage of the body, and raises it up to the contemplation of its divine original. Honors, monuments, and all the works of vanity and ambition are demolished and destroyed by time; but the reputation of wisdom is venerable to posterity, and those that were envied or neglected in their lives are adored in their memories, and exempted from the very laws of created nature, which has set bounds to all other things. The very shadow of glory carries a man of honor upon all dangers, to the contempt of fire and sword; and it were a shame if right reason should not inspire as generous resolutions into a man of virtue. Neither is philosophy only profitable to the public, but one wise man helps another, even in the exercise of the virtues; and the one has need of the other, both for conversation and counsel; for they kindle a mutual emulation in good offices. We are not so perfect yet, but that many new things remain still to be found out, which will give us the reciprocal advantages of instructing one another: for as one wicked man is contagious to another, and the more vices are mingled, the worse it is, so is it on the contrary with good men and their virtues. As men of letters are the most useful and excellent of friends, so are they the best of subjects; as being better judges of the blessings they enjoy under a well-ordered government, and of what they owe to the magistrate for their freedom and protection. They are men of sobriety and learning, and free from boasting and insolence; they reprove the vice without reproaching the person; for they have learned to be without either pomp or envy. That which we see in high mountains, we find in philosophers; they seem taller near at hand than at a distance. They are raised above other men, but their greatness is substantial. Nor do they stand upon tiptoe, that they may seem higher than they are, but, content with their own stature, they reckon themselves tall enough when fortune cannot reach them. Their laws are short, and yet comprehensive too, for they bind all. It is the bounty of nature that we live; but of philosophy that we live well, which is in truth a greater benefit than life itself. Not but that philosophy is also the gift of Heaven, so far as to the faculty, but not to the science; for that must be the business of industry. No man is born wise; but wisdom and virtue require a tutor, though we can easily learn to be vicious without a master. It is philosophy that gives us a veneration for God, a charity for our neighbor, that teaches us our duty to Heaven, and exhorts us to an agreement one with another; it unmasks things that are terrible to us, assuages our lusts, refutes our errors, restrains our luxury, reproves our avarice, and works strangely upon tender natures. I could never hear Attalus (says Seneca) upon the vices of the age and the errors of life, without a compassion for mankind; and in his discourses upon poverty, there was something methought that was more than human. “More than we use,” says he, “is more than we need, and only a burden to the bearer.” That saying of his put me out of countenance at the superfluities of my own fortune. And so in his invectives against vain pleasures, he did at such a rate advance the felicities of a sober table, a pure mind, and a chaste body that a man could not hear him without a love for continence and moderation. Upon these lectures of his, I denied myself, for a while after, certain delicacies that I had formerly used: but in a short time I fell to them again, though so sparingly, that the proportion came little short of a total abstinence. Now, to show you (says our author) how much earnester my entrance upon philosophy was than my progress, my tutor Sotion gave me a wonderful kindness for Pythagoras, and after him for Sextius: the former forbore shedding of blood upon his metempsychosis: and put men in fear of it, lest they should offer violence to the souls of some of their departed friends or relations. “Whether,” says he, “there be a transmigration or not; if it be true, there is no hurt; if false, there is frugality: and nothing is gotten by cruelty neither, but the cozening a wolf, perhaps, or a vulture, of a supper.” Now, Sextius abstained upon another account, which was, that he would not have men inured to hardness of heart by the laceration and tormenting of living creatures; beside, “that Nature had sufficiently provided for the sustenance of mankind without blood.” This wrought upon me so far that I gave over eating of flesh, and in one year I made it not only easy to me but pleasant; my mind methought was more at liberty, (and I am still of the same opinion,) but I gave it over nevertheless; and the reason was this: it was imputed as a superstition to the Jews, the forbearance of some sorts of flesh, and my father brought me back again to my old custom, that I might not be thought tainted with their superstition. Nay, and I had much ado to prevail upon myself to suffer it too. I make use of this instance to show the aptness of youth to take good impressions, if there be a friend at hand to press them. Philosophers are the tutors of mankind; if they have found out remedies for the mind, it must be our part to employ them. I cannot think of Cato, Lelius, Socrates, Plato, without veneration: their very names are sacred to me. Philosophy is the health of the mind; let us look to that health first, and in the second place to that of the body, which may be had upon easier terms; for a strong arm, a robust constitution, or the skill of procuring this, is not a philosopher’s business. He does some things as a wise man, and other things as he is a man; and he may have strength of body as well as of mind; but if he runs, or casts the sledge, it were injurious to ascribe that to his wisdom which is common to the greatest of fools. He studies rather to fill his mind than his coffers; and he knows that gold and silver were mingled with dirt, until avarice or ambition parted them. His life is ordinate, fearless, equal, secure; he stands firm in all extremities, and bears the lot of his humanity with a divine temper. There is a great difference betwixt the splendor of philosophy and of fortune; the one shines with an original light, the other with a borrowed one; beside that it makes us happy and immortal: for learning shall outlive palaces and monuments. The house of a wise man is safe, though narrow; there is neither noise nor furniture in it, no porter at the door, nor anything that is either vendible or mercenary, nor any business of fortune, for she has nothing to do where she has nothing to look after. This is the way to Heaven which Nature has chalked out, and it is both secure and pleasant; there needs no train of servants, no pomp or equipage, to make good our passage; no money or letters of credit, for expenses upon the voyage; but the graces of an honest mind will serve us upon the way, and make us happy at our journey’s end. To tell you my opinion now of the liberal sciences; I have no great esteem for any thing that terminates in profit or money; and yet I shall allow them to be so far beneficial, as they only prepare the understanding without detaining it. They are but the rudiments of wisdom, and only then to be learned when the mind is capable of nothing better, and the knowledge of them is better worth the keeping than the acquiring. They do not so much as pretend to the making of us virtuous, but only to give us an aptitude of disposition to be so. The grammarian’s business lies in a syntax of speech; or if he proceed to history, or the measuring of a verse, he is at the end of his line; but what signifies a congruity of periods, the computing of syllables, or the modifying of numbers, to the taming of our passions, or the repressing of our lusts? The philosopher proves the body of the sun to be large, but for the true dimensions of it we must ask the mathematician: geometry and music, if they do not teach us to master our hopes and fears, all the rest is to little purpose. What does it concern us which was the elder of the two, Homer or Hesiod? or which was the taller, Helen or Hecuba? We take a great deal of pains to trace Ulysses in his wanderings, but were it not time as well spent to look to ourselves that we may not wander at all? Are not we ourselves tossed with tempestuous passions? and both assaulted by terrible monsters on the one hand, and tempted by syrens on the other? Teach me my duty to my country, to my father, to my wife, to mankind. What is it to me whether Penelope was honest or not? teach me to know how to be so myself, and to live according to that knowledge. What am I the better for putting so many parts together in music, and raising a harmony out of so many different tones? teach me to tune my affections, and to hold constant to myself. Geometry teaches me the art of measuring acres; teach me to measure my appetites, and to know when I have enough; teach me to divide with my brother, and to rejoice in the prosperity of my neighbor. You teach me how I may hold my own, and keep my estate; but I would rather learn how I may lose it all, and yet be contented. “It is hard,” you will say, “for a man to be forced from the fortune of his family.” This estate, it is true, was my father’s; but whose was it in the time of my grandfather? I do not only say, what man’s was it? but what nation’s? The astrologer tells me of Saturn and Mars in opposition; but I say, let them be as they will, their courses and their positions are ordered them by an unchangeable decree of fate. Either they produce and point out the effects of all things, or else they signify them; if the former, what are we the better for the knowledge of that which must of necessity come to pass? If the latter, what does it avail us to foresee what we cannot avoid? So that whether we know or not know, the event will still be the same. He that designs the institution of human life should not be over-curious of his words; it does not stand with his dignity to be solicitous about sounds and syllables, and to debase the mind of man with trivial things; placing wisdom in matters that are rather difficult than great. If it be eloquent, it is his good fortune, not his business. Subtle disputations are only the sport of wits, that play upon the catch, and are fitter to be contemned than resolved. Were not I a madman to sit wrangling about words, and putting of nice and impertinent questions, when the enemy has already made the breach, the town fired over my head, and the mine ready to play that shall blow me up into the air? were this a time for fooleries? Let me rather fortify myself against death and inevitable necessities; let me understand that the good of life does not consist in the length or space, but in the use of it. When I go to sleep, who knows whether I shall ever wake again? and when I wake, whether ever I shall sleep again? When I go abroad, whether ever I shall come home again? and when I return, whether ever I shall go abroad again? It is not at sea only that life and death are within a few inches one of another; but they are as near everywhere else too, only we do not take so much notice of it. What have we to do with frivolous and captious questions, and impertinent niceties? Let us rather study how to deliver ourselves from sadness, fear, and the burden of all our secret lusts: let us pass over all our most solemn levities, and make haste to a good life, which is a thing that presses us. Shall a man that goes for a midwife, stand gaping upon a post to see what play to-day? or, when his house is on fire, stay the curling of a periwig before he calls for help? Our houses are on fire, our country invaded, our goods taken away, our children in danger; and, I might add to these, the calamities of earthquakes, shipwrecks, and whatever else is most terrible. Is this a time for us now to be playing fast and loose with idle questions, which are in effect so many unprofitable riddles? Our duty is the cure of the mind rather than the delight of it; but we have only the words of wisdom without the works; and turn philosophy into a pleasure that was given for a remedy. What can be more ridiculous than for a man to neglect his manners and compose his style? We are sick and ulcerous, and must be lanced and scarified, and every man has as much business within himself as a physician in a common pestilence. “Misfortunes,” in fine, “cannot be avoided; but they may be sweetened, if not overcome; and our lives may be made happy by philosophy.”  THE FORCE OF PRECEPTS. There seems to be so near an affinity betwixt wisdom, philosophy, and good counsels, that it is rather matter of curiosity than of profit to divide them; philosophy, being only a limited wisdom; and good counsels a communication of that wisdom, for the good of others, as well as of ourselves; and to posterity, as well as to the present. The wisdom of the ancients, as to the government of life, was no more than certain precepts, what to do and what not: and men were much better in that simplicity; for as they came to be more learned, they grew less careful of being good. That plain and open virtue is now turned into a dark and intricate science; and we are taught to dispute rather than to live. So long as wickedness was simple, simple remedies also were sufficient against it; but now it has taken root, and spread, we must make use of stronger. There are some dispositions that embrace good things as soon as they hear them; but they will still need quickening by admonition and precept. We are rash and forward in some cases, and dull in others; and there is no repressing of the one humor, or raising of the other, but by removing the causes of them; which are (in one word) false admiration and false fear.  Every man knows his duty to his country, to his friends, to his guests; and yet when he is called upon to draw his sword for the one, or to labor for the other, he finds himself distracted betwixt his apprehensions and his delights: he knows well enough the injury he does his wife in the keeping of a wench, and yet his lust overrules him: so that it is not enough to give good advice, unless we can take away that which hinders the benefit of it. If a man does what he ought to do, he will never do it constantly or equally, without knowing why he does it: and if it be only chance or custom, he that does well by chance, may do ill so too. And farther, a precept may direct us what we ought to do, and yet fall short in the manner of doing it: an expensive entertainment may, in one case be extravagance or gluttony, and yet a point of honor and discretion in another. Tiberius Cæsar had a huge mullet presented him, which he sent to the market to be sold: “and now,” says he, “my masters,” to some company with him, “you shall see that either Apicius or Octavius will be the chapman for this fish.” Octavius beat the price, and gave about thirty pounds sterling for it. Now, there was a great difference between Octavius, that bought it for his luxury, and the other that purchased it for a compliment to Tiberius. Precepts are idle, if we be not first taught what opinion we are to have of the matter in question; whether it be poverty, riches, disgrace, sickness, banishment, etc. Let us therefore examine them one by one; not what they are called, but what in truth they are. And so for the virtues; it is to no purpose to set a high esteem upon prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice, if we do not first know what virtue is; whether one or more; or if he that has one, has all; or how they differ. Precepts are of great weight; and a few useful ones at hand do more toward a happy life than whole volumes or cautions, that we know not where to find. These salutary precepts should be our daily meditation, for they are the rules by which we ought to square our lives. When they are contracted into sentences, they strike the affections: whereas admonition is only blowing of the coal; it moves the vigor of the mind, and excites virtue: we have the thing already, but we know not where it lies. It is by precept that the understanding is nourished and augmented: the offices of prudence and justice are guided by them, and they lead us to the execution of our duties. A precept delivered in verse has a much greater effect than in prose: and those very people that never think they have enough, let them but hear a sharp sentence against avarice, how will they clap and admire it, and bid open defiance to money? So soon as we find the affections struck, we must follow the blow; not with syllogisms or quirks of wit; but with plain and weighty reason and we must do it with kindness too, and respect for “there goes a blessing along with counsels and discourses that are bent wholly upon the good of the hearer:” and those are still the most efficacious that take reason along with them; and tell us as well why we are to do this or that, as what we are to do: for some understandings are weak, and need an instructor to expound to them what is good and what is evil. It is a great virtue to love, to give, and to follow good counsel; if it does not lead us to honesty, it does at least prompt us to it. As several parts make up but one harmony, and the most agreeable music arises from discords; so should a wise man gather many acts, many precepts, and the examples of many arts, to inform his own life. Our forefathers have left us in charge to avoid three things; hatred, envy, and contempt; now, it is hard to avoid envy and not incur contempt; for in taking too much care not to usurp upon others, we become many times liable to be trampled upon ourselves. Some people are afraid of others, because it is possible that others may be afraid of them: but let us secure ourselves upon all hands; for flattery is as dangerous as contempt. It is not to say, in case of admonition, I knew this before, for we know many things, but we do not think of them; so that it is the part of a monitor, not so much to teach as to mind us of our duties. Sometimes a man oversees that which lies just under his nose; otherwhile he is careless, or pretends not to see it: we do all know that friendship is sacred, and yet we violate it; and the greatest libertine expects that his own wife should be honest. Good counsel is the most needful service that we can do to mankind; and if we give it to many, it will be sure to profit some: for of many trials, some or other will undoubtedly succeed. He that places a man in the possession of himself does a great thing; for wisdom does not show itself so much in precept as in life; in a firmness of mind and a mastery of appetite: it teaches us to do as well as to talk: and to make our words and actions all of a color. If that fruit be pleasantest which we gather from a tree of our own planting, how much greater delight shall we take in the growth and increase of good manners of our own forming! It is an eminent mark of wisdom for a man to be always like himself. You shall have some that keep a thrifty table, and lavish out upon building; profuse upon themselves, and forbid to others; niggardly at home, and lavish abroad. This diversity is vicious, and the effect of a dissatisfied and uneasy mind; whereas every wise man lives by rule. This disagreement of purposes arises from hence, either that we do not propound to ourselves what we would be at; or if we do, that we do not pursue it, but pass from one thing to another; and we do not only change neither but return to the very thing which we had both quitted and condemned. In all our undertakings, let us first examine our own strength; the enterprise next; and, thirdly, the persons with whom we have to do. The first point is most important; for we are apt to overvalue ourselves, and reckon that we can do more than indeed we can. One man sets up for a speaker, and is out as soon as he opens his mouth; another overcharges his estate, perhaps, or his body: a bashful man is not fit for public business: some again are too stiff and peremptory for the court: many people are apt to fly out in their anger, nay, and in a frolic too; if any sharp thing fall in their way, they will rather venture a neck than lose a jest. These people had better be quiet in the world than busy. Let him that is naturally choleric and impatient avoid all provocations, and those affairs also that multiply and draw on more; and those also from which there is no retreat. When we may come off at pleasure, and fairly hope to bring our matters to a period, it is well enough. If it so happen that a man be tied up to business, which he can neither loosen nor break off, let him imagine those shackles upon his mind to be irons upon his legs: they are troublesome at first; but when there is no remedy but patience, custom makes them easy to us, and necessity gives us courage. We are all slaves to fortune: some only in loose and golden chains, others in strait ones, and coarser: nay, and they that bind us are slaves too themselves; some to honor, others to wealth; some to offices, and others to contempt; some to their superiors, others to themselves: nay, life itself is a servitude: let us make the best of it then, and with our philosophy mend our fortune. Difficulties may be softened, and heavy burdens disposed of to our ease. Let us covet nothing out of our reach, but content ourselves with things hopeful and at hand; and without envying the advantages of others; for greatness stands upon a craggy precipice, and it is much safer and quieter living upon a level. How many great men are forced to keep their station upon mere necessity; because they find there is no coming down from it but headlong? These men should do well to fortify themselves against ill consequences by such virtues and meditations as may make them less solicitous for the future. The surest expedient in this case is to bound our desires, and to leave nothing to fortune which we may keep in our own power. Neither will this course wholly compose us, but it shows us at worst the end of our troubles. It is but a main point to take care that we propose nothing but what is hopeful and honest. For it will be equally troublesome to us, either not to succeed, or to be ashamed of the success. Wherefore let us be sure not to admit any ill design into our heart; that we may lift up pure hands to heaven and ask nothing which another shall be a loser by. Let us pray for a good mind, which is a wish to no man’s injury. I will remember always that I am a man, and then consider, that if I am happy, it will not last always; if unhappy, I may be other if I please. I will carry my life in my hand, and deliver it up readily when it shall be called for. I will have a care of being a slave to myself; for it is a perpetual, a shameful, and the heaviest of all servitudes: and this may be done by moderate desires. I will say to myself, “What is it that I labor, sweat, and solicit for, when it is but very little that I want, and it will not be long that I will need any thing?” He that would make a trial of the firmness of his mind, let him set certain days apart for the practice of his virtues. Let him mortify himself with fasting, coarse clothes, and hard lodging; and then say to himself, “Is this the thing now that I was afraid of?” In a state of security, a man may thus prepare himself against hazards, and in plenty fortify himself against want. If you will have a man resolute when he comes to the push, train him up to it beforehand. The soldier does duty in peace, that he may be in breath when he comes to battle. How many great and wise men have made experiment of their moderation by a practice of abstinence, to the highest degree of hunger and thirst; and convinced themselves that a man may fill his belly without being beholden to fortune; which never denies any of us wherewith to satisfy our necessities, though she be never so angry! It is as easy to suffer it always as to try it once; and it is no more than thousands of servants and poor people do every day in their lives. He that would live happily, must neither trust to good fortune nor submit to bad: he must stand upon his guard against all assaults; he must stick to himself, without any dependence upon other people. Where the mind is tinctured with philosophy, there is no place for grief, anxiety, or superfluous vexations. It is prepossessed with virtue to the neglect of fortune, which brings us to a degree of security not to be disturbed. It is easier to give counsel than to take it; and a common thing for one choleric man to condemn another. We may be sometimes earnest in advising, but not violent or tedious. Few words, with gentleness and efficacy, are best: the misery is, that the wise do not need counsel, and fools will not take it. A good man, it is true, delights in it; and it is a mark of folly and ill-nature to hate reproof. To a friend I would be always frank and plain; and rather fail in the success than be wanting in the matter of faith and trust. There are some precepts that serve in common both to the rich and poor, but they are too general; as “Cure your avarice, and the work is done.” It is one thing not to desire money, and another thing not to understand how to use it. In the choice of the persons we have to do withal, we should see that they be worth our while; in the choice of our business, we are to consult nature, and follow our inclinations. He that gives sober advice to a witty droll must look to have every thing turned into ridicule. “As if you philosophers,” says Marcellinus, “did not love your whores and your guts as well as other people:” and then he tells you of such and such that were taken in the manner. We are all sick, I must confess, and it is not for sick men to play the physicians; but it is yet lawful for a man in an hospital to discourse of the common condition and distempers of the place. He that should pretend to teach a madman how to speak, walk, and behave himself, were not he the most mad man of the two? He that directs the pilot, makes him move the helm, order the sails so or so, and makes the best of a scant wind, after this or that manner. And so should we do in our counsels. Do not tell me what a man should do in health or poverty, but show me the way to be either sound or rich. Teach me to master my vices: for it is to no purpose, so long as I am under their government, to tell me what I must do when I am clear of it. In case of an avarice a little eased, a luxury moderated, a temerity restrained, a sluggish humor quickened; precepts will then help us forward, and tutor us how to behave ourselves. It is the first and the main tie of a soldier his military oath, which is an engagement upon him both of religion and honor. In like manner, he that pretends to a happy life must first lay a foundation of virtue, as a bond upon him, to live and die true to that cause. We do not find felicity in the veins of the earth where we dig for gold, nor in the bottom of the sea where we fish for pearls, but in a pure and untainted mind, which, if it were not holy, were not fit to entertain the Deity. “He that would be truly happy, must think his own lot best, and so live with men, as considering that God sees him, and so speak to God as if men heard him.”   NO FELICITY LIKE PEACE OF CONSCIENCE. “A good conscience is the testimony of a good life, and the reward of it.” This is it that fortifies the mind against fortune, when a man has gotten the mastery of his passions; placed his treasure and security within himself; learned to be content with his condition; and that death is no evil in itself, but only the end of man. He that has dedicated his mind to virtue, and to the good of human society, whereof he is a member, has consummated all that is either profitable or necessary for him to know or to do toward the establishment of his peace. Every man has a judge and a witness within himself of all the good and ill that he does, which inspires us with great thoughts, and administers to us wholesome counsels. We have a veneration for all the works of Nature, the heads of rivers, and the springs of medicinal waters; the horrors of groves and of caves strike us with an impression of religion and worship. To see a man fearless in dangers, untainted with lusts, happy in adversity, composed in a tumult, and laughing at all those things which are generally either coveted or feared; all men must acknowledge that this can be nothing else but a beam of divinity that influences a mortal body. And this is it that carries us to the disquisition of things divine and human; what the state of the world was before the distribution of the first matter into parts; what power it was that drew order out of that confusion, and gave laws both to the whole, and to every particle thereof; what that space is beyond the world; and whence proceed the several operations of Nature. Shall any man see the glory and order of the universe; so many scattered parts and qualities wrought into one mass; such a medley of things, which are yet distinguished: the world enlightened, and the disorders of it so wonderfully regulated; and shall he not consider the Author and Disposer of all this; and whither we ourselves shall go, when our souls shall be delivered from the slavery of our flesh? The whole creation we see conforms to the dictates of Providence, and follows God both as a governor and as a guide. A great, a good, and a right mind, is a kind of divinity lodged in flesh, and may be the blessing of a slave as well as of a prince; it came from heaven, and to heaven it must return; and it is a kind of heavenly felicity, which a pure and virtuous mind enjoys, in some degree, even upon earth: whereas temples of honor are but empty names, which, probably, owe their beginning either to ambition or to violence. I am strangely transported with the thoughts of eternity; nay, with the belief of it; for I have a profound veneration for the opinions of great men, especially when they promise things so much to my satisfaction: for they do promise them, though they do not prove them. In the question of the immortality of the soul, it goes very far with me, a general consent to the opinion of a future reward and punishment; which meditation raises me to the contempt of this life, in hopes of a better. But still, though we know that we have a soul; yet what the soul is, how, and from whence, we are utterly ignorant: this only we understand, that all the good and ill we do is under the dominion of the mind; that a clear conscience states us in an inviolable peace; and that the greatest blessing in Nature is that which every honest man may bestow upon himself. The body is but the clog and prisoner of the mind; tossed up and down, and persecuted with punishments, violences, and diseases; but the mind itself is sacred and eternal, and exempt from the danger of all actual impression. Provided that we look to our consciences, no matter for opinion: let me deserve well, though I hear ill. The common people take stomach and audacity for the marks of magnanimity and honor; and if a man be soft and modest, they look upon him as an easy fop; but when they come once to observe the dignity of his mind in the equality and firmness of his actions; and that his external quiet is founded upon an internal peace, the very same people who have him in esteem and admiration; for there is no man but approves of virtue, though but few pursue it; we see where it is, but we dare not venture to come at it: and the reason is, we overvalue that which we must quit to obtain it. A good conscience fears no witnesses, but a guilty conscience is solicitous even of solitude. If we do nothing but what is honest, let all the world know it; but if otherwise, what does it signify to have nobody else know it, so long as I know it myself? Miserable is he that slights that witness! Wickedness, it is true, may escape the law, but not the conscience; for a private conviction is the first and the greatest punishment to offenders; so that sin plagues itself; and the fear of vengeance pursues even those that escape the stroke of it. It were ill for good men that iniquity may so easily evade the law, the judge, and the execution, if Nature had not set up torments and gibbets in the consciences of transgressors. He that is guilty lives in perpetual terror; and while he expects to be punished, he punishes himself; and whosoever deserves it expects it. What if he be not detected? he is still in apprehension yet that he may be so. His sleeps are painful, and never secure; and he cannot speak of another man’s wickedness without thinking of his own, whereas a good conscience is a continual feast. Those are the only certain and profitable delights, which arise from the consciousness of a well-acted life; no matter for noise abroad, so long as we are quiet within: but if our passions be seditious, that is enough to keep us waking without any other tumult. It is not the posture of the body, or the composure of the bed, that will give rest to an uneasy mind: there is an impatient sloth that may be roused by action, and the vices of laziness must be cured by business. True happiness is not to be found in excesses of wine, or of women, or in the largest prodigalities of fortune; what she has given to me, she may take away, but she shall not tear it from me; and, so long as it does not grow to me, I can part with it without pain. He that would perfectly know himself, let him set aside his money, his fortune, his dignity, and examine himself naked, without being put to learn from others the knowledge of himself. It is dangerous for a man too suddenly, or too easily, to believe himself. Wherefore let us examine, observe, and inspect our own hearts, for we ourselves are our own greatest flatterers: we should every night call ourselves to account, “What infirmity have I mastered to-day? what passion opposed? what temptation resisted? what virtue acquired?” Our vices will abate of themselves, if they be brought every day to the shrift. Oh the blessed sleep that follows such a diary! Oh the tranquillity, liberty, and greatness of that mind that is a spy upon itself, and a private censor of its own manners! It is my custom (says our author) every night, so soon as the candle is out, to run over all the words and actions of the past day; and I let nothing escape me; for why should I fear the sight of my own errors, when I can admonish and forgive myself? “I was a little too hot in such a dispute: my opinion might have been as well spared, for it gave offence, and did no good at all. The thing was true, but all truths are not to be spoken at all times; I would I had held my tongue, for there is no contending either with fools or our superiors. I have done ill, but it shall be so no more.” If every man would but thus look into himself, it would be the better for us all. What can be more reasonable than this daily review of a life that we cannot warrant for a moment? Our fate is set, and the first breath we draw is only the first motion toward our last: one cause depends upon another; and the course of all things, public and private, is but a long connection of providential appointments. There is a great variety in our lives, but all tends to the same issue. Nature may use her own bodies as she pleases; but a good man has this consolation, that nothing perishes which he can call his own. It is a great comfort that we are only condemned to the same fate with the universe; the heavens themselves are mortal as well as our bodies; Nature has made us passive, and to suffer is our lot. While we are in flesh, every man has his chain and his clog, only it is looser and lighter to one man than to another; and he is more at ease that takes it up and carries it, than he that drags it. We are born, to lose and to perish, to hope and to fear, to vex ourselves and others; and there is no antidote against a common calamity but virtue; for “the foundation of true joy is in the conscience.”  . A GOOD MAN CAN NEVER BE MISERABLE, NOR A WICKED MAN HAPPY. There is not in the scale of nature a more inseparable connection of cause and effect, than in the case of happiness and virtue; nor anything that more naturally produces the one, or more necessarily presupposes the other. For what is it to be happy, but for a man to content himself with his lot, in a cheerful and quiet resignation to the appointments of God? All the actions of our lives ought to be governed with respect to good and evil: and it is only reason that distinguishes; by which reason we are in such manner influenced, as if a ray of the Divinity were dipt in a mortal body, and that is the perfection of mankind. It is true, we have not the eyes of eagles or the sagacity of hounds: nor if we had, could we pretend to value ourselves upon anything which we have in common with brutes. What are we the better for that which is foreign to us, and may be given and taken away? As the beams of the sun irradiate the earth, and yet remain where they were; so is it in some proportion with a holy mind that illustrates all our actions, and yet it adheres to its original. Why do we not as well commend a horse for his glorious trappings, as a man for his pompous additions? How much a braver creature is a lion, (which by nature ought to be fierce and terrible) how much braver (I say) in his natural horror than in his chains? so that everything in its pure nature pleases us best. It is not health, nobility, riches, that can justify a wicked man: nor is it the want of all these that can discredit a good one. That is the sovereign blessing, which makes the possessor of it valuable without anything else, and him that wants it contemptible, though he had all the world besides. It is not the painting, gilding, or carving, that makes a good ship; but if she be a nimble sailer, tight and strong to endure the seas; that is her excellency. It is the edge and temper of the blade that makes a good sword, not the richness of the scabbard: and so it is not money or possessions, that makes a man considerable, but his virtue. It is every man’s duty to make himself profitable to mankind—if he can, to many—if not, to fewer—if not so neither, to his neighbor—but, however, to himself. There are two republics: a great one, which is human nature; and a less, which is the place where we were born. Some serve both at a time, some only the greater, and some again only the less. The greater may be served in privacy, solitude, contemplation, and perchance that way better than any other; but it was the intent of Nature, however, that we should serve both. A good man may serve the public, his friend, and himself in any station: if he be not for the sword, let him take the gown; if the bar does not agree with him, let him try the pulpit; if he be silenced abroad, let him give counsel at home, and discharge the part of a faithful friend and a temperate companion. When he is no longer a citizen, he is yet a man; but the whole world is his country, and human nature never wants matter to work upon: but if nothing will serve a man in the civil government unless he be prime minister, or in the field but to command in chief, it is his own fault. The common soldier where he cannot use his hands, fights with his looks, his example, his encouragement, his voice, and stands his ground even when he has lost his hands, and does service too with his very clamor, so that in any condition whatsoever, he still discharges the duty of a good patriot—nay, he that spends his time well even in a retirement, gives a great example. We may enlarge, indeed, or contract, according to the circumstances of time, place, or abilities; but above all things we must be sure to keep ourselves in action, for he that is slothful is dead even while he lives. Was there ever any state so desperate as that of Athens under the thirty tyrants—where it was capital to be honest, and the senate-house was turned into a college of hangmen? Never was any government so wretched and so hopeless; and yet Socrates at the same time preached temperance to the tyrants, and courage to the rest, and afterwards died an eminent example of faith and resolution, and a sacrifice for the common good. It is not for a wise man to stand shifting and fencing with fortune, but to oppose her barefaced, for he is sufficiently convinced that she can do him no hurt; she may take away his servants, possessions, dignity, assault his body, put out his eyes, cut off his hands, and strip him of all the external comforts of life. But what does all this amount to more than the recalling of a trust which he has received, with condition to deliver it up again upon demand? He looks upon himself as precarious, and only lent to himself, and yet he does not value himself ever the less because he is not his own, but takes such care as an honest man should do of a thing that is committed to him in trust. Whensoever he that lent me myself and what I have, shall call for all back again, it is not a loss but a restitution, and I must willingly deliver up what most undeservedly was bestowed upon me, and it will become me to return my mind better than I received it. Demetrius, upon the taking of Megara, asked Stilpo, the philosopher, what he had lost. “Nothing,” said he, “for I had all that I could call my own about me.” And yet the enemy had then made himself master of his patrimony, his children, and his country; but these he looked upon as only adventitious goods, and under the command of fortune. Now, he that neither lost any thing nor feared any thing in a public ruin, but was safe and at peace in the middle of the flames, and in the heat of a military intemperance and fury—what violence or provocation imaginable can put such a man as this out of the possession of himself? Walls and castles may be mined and battered, but there is no art or engine that can subvert a steady mind. “I have made my way,” says Stilpo, “through fire and blood—what has become of my children I know not; but these are transitory blessings, and servants that are bound to change their masters; what was my own before is my own still. Some have lost their estates, others their dear-bought mistresses, their commissions and offices: the usurers have lost their bonds and securities: but, Demetrius, for my part I have saved all, and do not imagine after all this, either that Demetrius is a conqueror, or that Stilpo is overcome—it is only thy fortune has been too hard for mine.” Alexander took Babylon, Scipio took Carthage, the capitol was burnt; but there is no fire or violence that can discompose a generous mind; and let us not take this character either for a chimera, for all ages afford some, though not many, instances of this elevated virtue. A good man does his duty, let it be never so painful, so hazardous, or never so great a loss to him; and it is not all the money, the power, and the pleasure in the world; not any force of necessity, that can make him wicked: he considers what he is to do, not what he is to suffer, and will keep on his course, though there should be nothing but gibbets and torments in the way. And in this instance of Stilpo, who, when he had lost his country, his wife, his children, the town on fire over his head, himself escaping very hardly and naked out of the flames; “I have saved all my goods,” says he, “my justice, my courage, my temperance, my prudence;” accounting nothing his own, or valuable, and showing how much easier it was to overcome a nation than one wise man. It is a certain mark of a brave mind not to be moved by any accidents: the upper region of the air admits neither clouds nor tempests; the thunder, storms, and meteors, are formed below; and this is the difference betwixt a mean and an exalted mind; the former is rude and tumultuary; the latter is modest, venerable, composed, and always quiet in its station. In brief, it is the conscience that pronounces upon the man whether he be happy or miserable. But, though sacrilege and adultery be generally condemned, how many are there still that do not so much as blush at the one, and in truth that take a glory in the other? For nothing is more common than for great thieves to ride in triumph when the little ones are punished. But let “wickedness escape as it may at the bar, it never fails of doing justice upon itself; for every guilty person is his own hangman.”  I. THE DUE CONTEMPLATION OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE IS THE CERTAIN CURE OF ALL MISFORTUNES. Whoever observes the world, and the order of it, will find all the motions in it to be only vicissitudes of falling and rising; nothing extinguished, and even those things which seem to us to perish are in truth but changed. The seasons go and return, day and night follow in their courses, the heavens roll, and Nature goes on with her work: all things succeed in their turns, storms and calms; the law of Nature will have it so, which we must follow and obey, accounting all things that are done to be well done; so that what we cannot mend we must suffer, and wait upon Providence without repining. It is the part of a cowardly soldier to follow his commander groaning: but a generous man delivers himself up to God without struggling; and it is only for a narrow mind to condemn the order of the world, and to propound rather the mending of Nature than of himself. No man has any cause of complaint against Providence, if that which is right pleases him. Those glories that appear fair to the eye, their lustre is but false and superficial; and they are only vanity and delusion: they are rather the goods of a dream than a substantial possession: they may cozen us at a distance, but bring them once to the touch, they are rotten and counterfeit. There are no greater wretches in the world than many of those which the people take to be happy. Those are the only true and incorruptible comforts that will abide all trials, and the more we turn and examine them, the more valuable we find them; and the greatest felicity of all is, not to stand in need of any. What is poverty? No man lives so poor as he was born. What is pain? It will either have an end itself, or make an end of us. In short, Fortune has no weapon that reaches the mind: but the bounties of Providence are certain and permanent blessings; and they are the greater and the better, the longer we consider them; that is to say, “the power of contemning things terrible, and despising what the common people covet.” In the very methods of Nature we cannot but observe the regard that Providence had to the good of mankind, even in the disposition of the world, in providing so amply for our maintenance and satisfaction. It is not possible for us to comprehend what the Power is which has made all things: some few sparks of that Divinity are discovered, but infinitely the greater part of it lies hid. We are all of us, however, thus far agreed, first, in the acknowledgement and belief of that almighty Being; and, secondly, that we are to ascribe to it all majesty and goodness. “If there be a Providence,” say some, “how comes it to pass that good men labor under affliction and adversity, and wicked men enjoy themselves in ease and plenty?” My answer is, that God deals by us as a good father does by his children; he tries us, he hardens us, and fits us for himself. He keeps a strict hand over those that he loves; and by the rest he does as we do by our slaves; he lets them go on in license and boldness.  As the master gives his most hopeful scholars the hardest lessons, so does God deal with the most generous spirits; and the cross encounters of fortune we are not to look upon as a cruelty, but as a contest: the familiarity of dangers brings us to the contempt of them, and that part is strongest which is most exercised: the seaman’s hand is callous, the soldier’s arm is strong, and the tree that is most exposed to the wind takes the best root: there are people that live in a perpetual winter, in extremity of frost and penury, where a cave, a lock of straw, or a few leaves, is all their covering, and wild beasts their nourishment; all this by custom is not only made tolerable, but when it is once taken up upon necessity, by little and little, it becomes pleasant to them. Why should we then count that condition of life a calamity which is the lot of many nations? There is no state of life so miserable but that there are in it remissions, diversions, nay, and delights too; such is the benignity of Nature towards us, even in the severest accidents of human life. There were no living if adversity should hold on as it begins, and keep up the force of the first impression. We are apt to murmur at many things as great evils, that have nothing at all of evil in them besides the complaint, which we should more reasonably take up against ourselves. If I be sick, it is part of my fate; and for other calamities, they are usual things; they ought to be; nay, which is more, they must be, for they come by divine appointment. So that we should not only submit to God, but assent to him, and obey him out of duty, even if there were no necessity. All those terrible appearances that make us groan and tremble are but the tribute of life; we are neither to wish, nor to ask, nor to hope to escape them; for it is a kind of dishonesty to pay a tribute unwillingly. Am I troubled with the stone, or afflicted with continual losses? nay, is my body in danger? All this is no more than what I prayed for when I prayed for old age. All these things are as familiar in a long life, as dust and dirt in a long way. Life is a warfare; and what brave man would not rather choose to be in a tent than in shambles? Fortune does like a swordsman, she scorns to encounter a fearful man: there is no honor in the victory where there is no danger in the way to it; she tries Mucius by fire; Rutilius by exile; Socrates by poison; Cato by death. It is only in adverse fortune, and in bad times, that we find great examples. Mucius thought himself happier with his hand in the flame, than if it had been in the bosom of his mistress. Fabricius took more pleasure in eating the roots of his own planting than in all the delicacies of luxury and expense. Shall we call Rutilius miserable, whom his very enemies have adored? who, upon a glorious and a public principle, chose rather to lose his country than to return from banishment? the only man that denied any thing to Sylla the dictator, who recalled him. Nor did he only refuse to come, but drew himself further off: “Let them,” says he, “that think banishment a misfortune, live slaves at Rome, under the imperial cruelties of Sylla: he that sets a price upon the heads of senators; and after a law of his own institution against cut-throats, becomes the greatest himself.” Is it not better for a man to live in exile abroad than to be massacred at home? In suffering for virtue, it is not the torment but the cause, that we are to consider; and the more pain, the more renown. When any hardship befalls us, we must look upon it as an act of Providence, which many times suffers particulars to be wounded for the conservation of the whole: beside that, God chastises some people under an appearance of blessing them, turning their prosperity to their ruin as a punishment for abusing his goodness. And we are further to consider, that many a good man is afflicted, only to teach others to suffer; for we are born for example; and likewise that where men are contumacious and refractory, it pleases God many times to cure greater evils by less, and to turn our miseries to our advantage. How many casualties and difficulties are there that we dread as insupportable mischiefs, which, upon farther thoughts, we find to be mercies and benefits? as banishment, poverty, loss of relations, sickness, disgrace. Some are cured by the lance; by fire, hunger, thirst; taking out of bones, lopping off limbs, and the like: nor do we only fear things that are many times beneficial to us; but, on the other side, we hanker after and pursue things that are deadly and pernicious: we are poisoned in the very pleasure of our luxury, and betrayed to a thousand diseases by the indulging of our palate. To lose a child or a limb, is only to part with what we have received, and Nature may do what she pleases with her own. We are frail ourselves, and we have received things transitory—that which was given us may be taken away—calamity tries virtue as the fire does gold, nay, he that lives most at ease is only delayed, not dismissed, and his portion is to come. When we are visited with sickness or other afflictions we are not to murmur as if we were ill used—it is a mark of the general’s esteem when he puts us upon a post of danger: we do not say “My captain uses me ill,” but “he does me honor;” and so should we say that are commanded to encounter difficulties, for this is our case with God Almighty. What was Regulus the worse, because Fortune made choice of him for an eminent instance both of faith and patience? He was thrown into a case of wood stuck with pointed nails, so that which way soever he turned his body, it rested upon his wounds; his eyelids were cut off to keep him waking; and yet Mecænas was not happier upon his bed than Regulus upon his torments. Nay, the world is not yet grown so wicked as not to prefer Regulus before Mecænas: and can any man take that to be an evil of which Providence accounted this brave man worthy? “It has pleased God,” says he, “to single me out for an experiment of the force of human nature.” No man knows his own strength or value but by being put to the proof. The pilot is tried in a storm; the soldier in a battle; the rich man knows not how to behave himself in poverty: he that has lived in popularity and applause, knows not how he would bear infamy and reproach: nor he that never had children how he would bear the loss of them. Calamity is the occasion of virtue, and a spur to a great mind. The very apprehension of a wound startles a man when he first bears arms; but an old soldier bleeds boldly, because he knows that a man may lose blood, and yet win the day. Nay, many times a calamity turns to our advantage; and great ruins have but made way to greater glories. The crying out of fire has many times quieted a fray, and the interposing of a wild beast has parted the thief and the traveller; for we are not at leisure for less mischiefs while we are under the apprehensions of greater. One man’s life is saved by a disease: another is arrested, and taken out of the way, just when his house was falling upon his head. To show now that the favors or the crosses of fortune, and the accidents of sickness and of health, are neither good nor evil, God permits them indifferently both to good and evil men. “It is hard,” you will say, “for a virtuous man to suffer all sorts of misery, and for a wicked man not only to go free, but to enjoy himself at pleasure.” And is it not the same thing for men of prostituted impudence and wickedness to sleep in a whole skin, when men of honor and honesty bear arms; lie in the trenches, and receive wounds? or for the vestal virgins to rise in the night to their prayers, when common strumpets lie stretching themselves in their beds? We should rather say with Demetrius, “If I had known the will of Heaven before I was called to it, I would have offered myself.” If it be the pleasure of God to take my children, I have brought them up to that end: if my fortune, any part of my body, or my life, I would rather present it than yield it up: I am ready to part with all, and to suffer all; for I know that nothing comes to pass but what God appoints: our fate is decreed, and things do not so much happen, as in their due time proceed, and every man’s portion of joy and sorrow is predetermined. There is nothing falls amiss to a good man that can be charged upon Providence; for wicked actions, lewd thoughts, ambitious projects, blind lusts, and insatiable avarice—against all these he is armed by the benefit of reason: and do we expect now that God should look to our luggage too? (I mean our bodies.) Demetrius discharged himself of his treasure as the clog and burden of his mind: shall we wonder then if God suffers that to befall a good man which a good man sometimes does to himself? I lose a son, and why not, when it may sometimes so fall out that I myself may kill him? Suppose he be banished by an order of state, is it not the same thing with a man’s voluntarily leaving his country never to return? Many afflictions may befall a good man, but no evil, for contraries will never incorporate—all the rivers in the world are never able to change the taste or quality of the sea. Prudence and religion are above accidents, and draw good out of every thing—affliction keeps a man in use, and makes him strong, patient, and hardy. Providence treats us like a generous father, and brings us up to labors, toils, and dangers; whereas the indulgence of a fond mother makes us weak and spiritless. God loves us with a masculine love, and turns us loose to injuries and indignities: he takes delight to see a brave and a good man wrestling with evil fortune, and yet keeping himself upon his legs, when the whole world is in disorder about him. And are not we ourselves delighted, to see a bold fellow press with his lance upon a boar or lion? and the constancy and resolution of the action is the grace and dignity of the spectacle. No man can be happy that does not stand firm against all contingencies; and say to himself in all extremities, “I should have been content, if it might have been so or so, but since it is otherwise determined, God will provide better.” The more we struggle with our necessities, we draw the knot the harder, and the worse it is with us: and the more a bird flaps and flutters in the snare, the surer she is caught: so that the best way is to submit and lie still, under this double consideration, that “the proceedings of God are unquestionable, and his decrees are not to be resisted.”   OF LEVITY OF MIND, AND OTHER IMPEDIMENTS OF A HAPPY LIFE. Now, to sum up what is already delivered, we have showed what happiness is, and wherein it consists: that it is founded upon wisdom and virtue; for we must first know what we ought to do, and then live according to that knowledge. We have also discoursed the helps of philosophy and precept toward a happy life; the blessing of a good conscience; that a good man can never be miserable, nor a wicked man happy; nor any man unfortunate that cheerfully submits to Providence. We shall now examine, how it comes to pass that, when the certain way to happiness lies so fair before us, men will yet steer their course on the other side, which as manifestly leads to ruin. There are some that live without any design at all, and only pass in the world like straws upon a river; they do not go, but they are carried. Others only deliberate upon the parts of life, and not upon the whole, which is a great error: for there is no disposing of the circumstances of it, unless we first propound the main scope. How shall any man take his aim without a mark? or what wind will serve him that is not yet resolved upon his port? We live as it were by chance, and by chance we are governed. Some there are that torment themselves afresh with the memory of what is past: “Lord! what did I endure? never was any man in my condition; everybody gave me over; my very heart was ready to break,” etc. Others, again, afflict themselves with the apprehension of evils to come; and very ridiculously: for the one does not now concern us, and the other not yet: beside that, there may he remedies for mischiefs likely to happen; for they give us warning by signs and symptoms of their approach. Let him that would be quiet take heed not to provoke men that are in power, but live without giving offence; and if we cannot make all great men our friends, it will suffice to keep them from being our enemies. This is a thing we must avoid, as a mariner would do a storm. A rash seaman never considers what wind blows, or what course he steers, but runs at a venture, as if he would brave the rocks and the eddies; whereas he that is careful and considerate, informs himself beforehand where the danger lies, and what weather it is like to be: he consults his compass, and keeps aloof from those places that are infamous for wrecks and miscarriages; so does a wise man in the common business of life; he keeps out of the way from those that may do him hurt: but it is a point of prudence not to let them take notice that he does it on purpose; for that which a man shuns he tacitly condemns. Let him have a care also of listeners, newsmongers, and meddlers in other people’s matters; for their discourse is commonly of such things as are never profitable, and most commonly dangerous either to be spoken or heard. Levity of mind is a great hindrance of repose, and the very change of wickedness is an addition to the wickedness itself; for it is inconstancy added to iniquity; we relinquish the thing we sought, and then we take it up again; and so divide our lives between our lust and our repentances. From one appetite we pass to another, not so much upon choice as for change; and there is a check of conscience that casts a damp upon all our unlawful pleasures, which makes us lose the day in expectation of the night, and the night itself for fear of the approaching light. Some people are never at quiet, others are always so, and they are both to blame: for that which looks like vivacity and industry in the one is only a restlessness and agitation; and that which passes in the other for moderation and reserve is but a drowsy and unactive sloth. Let motion and rest both take their turns, according to the order of Nature, which makes both the day and the night. Some are perpetually shifting from one thing to another; others, again, make their whole life but a kind of uneasy sleep: some lie tossing and turning until very weariness brings them to rest; others, again, I cannot so properly call inconstant as lazy. There are many proprieties and diversities of vice; but it is one never-failing effect of it to live displeased. We do all of us labor under inordinate desires; we are either timorous, and dare not venture, or venturing we do not succeed; or else we cast ourselves upon uncertain hopes, where we are perpetually solicitous, and in suspense. In this distraction we are apt to propose to ourselves things dishonest and hard; and when we have taken great pains to no purpose, we come then to repent of our undertakings: we are afraid to go on, and we can neither master our appetites nor obey them: we live and die restless and irresolute; and, which is worst of all, when we grow weary of the public, and betake ourselves to solitude for relief, our minds are sick and wallowing, and the very house and walls are troublesome to us; we grow impatient and ashamed of ourselves, and suppress our inward vexation until it breaks our heart for want of vent. This is it that makes us sour and morose, envious of others, and dissatisfied with ourselves; until at last, betwixt our troubles for other people’s successes and the despair of our own, we fall foul upon Fortune and the times, and get into a corner perhaps, where we sit brooding over our own disquiets. In these dispositions there is a kind of pruriginous fancy, that makes some people take delight in labor and uneasiness, like the clawing of an itch until the blood starts. This is it that puts us upon rambling voyages; one while by land; but still disgusted with the present: the town pleases us to-day, the country to-morrow: the splendors of the court at one time, the horrors of a wilderness at another, but all this while we carry our plague about us; for it is not the place we are weary of, but ourselves. Nay, our weakness extends to everything; for we are impatient equally of toil and of pleasure. This trotting of the ring, and only treading the same steps over and over again, has made many a man lay violent hands upon himself. It must be the change of the mind, not of the climate, that will remove the heaviness of the heart; our vices go along with us, and we carry in ourselves the causes of our disquiets. There is a great weight lies upon us, and the bare shocking of it makes it the more uneasy; changing of countries, in this case, is not travelling, but wandering. We must keep on our course, if we would gain our journey’s end. “He that cannot live happily anywhere, will live happily nowhere.” What is a man the better for travelling? as if his cares could not find him out wherever he goes? Is there any retiring from the fear of death, or of torments? or from those difficulties which beset a man wherever he is? It is only philosophy that makes the mind invincible, and places us out of the reach of fortune, so that all her arrows fall short of us. This it is that reclaims the rage of our lusts, and sweetens the anxiety of our fears. Frequent changing of places or councils, shows an instability of mind; and we must fix the body before we can fix the soul. We can hardly stir abroad, or look about us, without encountering something or other that revives our appetites. As he that would cast off an unhappy love avoids whatsoever may put him in mind of the person, so he that would wholly deliver himself from his beloved lusts must shun all objects that may put them in his head again, and remind him of them. We travel, as children run up and down after strange sights, for novelty, not profit; we return neither the better nor the sounder; nay, and the very agitation hurts us. We learn to call towns and places by their names, and to tell stories of mountains and of rivers; but had not our time been better spent in the study of wisdom and of virtue? in the learning of what is already discovered, and in the quest of things not yet found out? If a man break his leg, or strain his ankle, he sends presently for a surgeon to set all right again, and does not take horse upon it, or put himself on ship-board; no more does the change of place work upon our disordered minds than upon our bodies. It is not the place, I hope, that makes either an orator or a physician. Will any man ask upon the road, Pray, which is the way to prudence, to justice, to temperance, to fortitude? No matter whither any man goes that carries his affections along with him. He that would make his travels delightful must make himself a temperate companion. A great traveller was complaining that he was never the better for his travels; “That is very true,” said Socrates, “because you travelled with yourself.” Now, had not he better have made himself another man than to transport himself to another place? It is no matter what manners we find anywhere; so long as we carry our own. But we have all of us a natural curiosity of seeing fine sights, and of making new discoveries, turning over antiquities, learning the customs of nations, etc. We are never quiet; to-day we seek an office, to-morrow we are sick of it. We divide our lives betwixt a dislike of the present and a desire of the future: but he that lives as he should, orders himself so, as neither to fear nor to wish for to-morrow; if it comes, it is welcome; but if not, there is nothing lost; for that which is come, is but the same over again with what is past. As levity is a pernicious enemy to quiet, so pertinacity is a great one too. The one changes nothing, the other sticks to nothing; and which of the two is the worse, may be a question. It is many times seen, that we beg earnestly for those things, which, if they were offered us, we would refuse; and it is but just to punish this easiness of asking with an equal facility of granting. There are some things we would be thought to desire, which we are so far from desiring that we dread them. “I shall tire you,” says one, in the middle of a tedious story. “Nay, pray be pleased to go on,” we cry, though we wish his tongue out at half-way: nay, we do not deal candidly even with God himself. We should say to ourselves in these cases, “This I have drawn upon myself. I could never be quiet until I had gotten this woman, this place, this estate, this honor, and now see what is come of it.” One sovereign remedy against all misfortunes is constancy of mind: the changing of parties and countenances looks as if a man were driven with the wind. Nothing can be above him that is above fortune. It is not violence, reproach, contempt, or whatever else from without, that can make a wise man quit his ground: but he is proof against calamities, both great and small: only our error is, that what we cannot do ourselves, we think nobody else can; so that we judge of the wise by the measures of the weak. Place me among princes or among beggars, the one shall not make me proud, nor the other ashamed. I can take as sound a sleep in a barn as in a palace, and a bundle of hay makes me as good a lodging as a bed of down. Should every day succeed to my wish, it should not transport me; nor would I think myself miserable if I should not have one quiet hour in my life. I will not transport myself with either pain or pleasure; but yet for all that, I could wish that I had an easier game to play, and that I were put rather to moderate my joys than my sorrows. If I were an imperial prince, I had rather take than be taken; and yet I would bear the same mind under the chariot of my conqueror that I had in my own. It is no great matter to trample upon those things that are most coveted or feared by the common people. There are those that will laugh upon the wheel, and cast themselves upon a certain death, only upon a transport of love, perhaps anger, avarice, or revenge; how much more then upon an instinct of virtue, which is invincible and steady! If a short obstinacy of mind can do this, how much more shall a composed and deliberate virtue, whose force is equal and perpetual. To secure ourselves in this world, first, we must aim at nothing that men count worth the wrangling for. Secondly, we must not value the possession of any thing which even a common thief would think worth the stealing. A man’s body is no booty. Let the way be never so dangerous for robberies, the poor and the naked pass quietly. A plain-dealing sincerity of manners makes a man’s life happy, even in despite of scorn and contempt, which is every clear man’s fate. But we had better yet be contemned for simplicity than lie perpetually upon the torture of a counterfeit; provided that care be taken not to confound simplicity with negligence; and it is, moreover, an uneasy life that of a disguise; for a man to seem to be what he is not, to keep a perpetual guard upon himself, and to live in fear of a discovery. He takes every man that looks upon him for a spy, over and above the trouble of being put to play another man’s part. It is a good remedy in some cases for a man to apply himself to civil affairs and public business; and yet, in this state of life too, what betwixt ambition and calumny, it is hardly safe to be honest. There are, indeed, some cases wherein a wise man will give way; but let him not yield over easily neither; if he marches off, let him have a care of his honor, and make his retreat with his sword in his hand, and his face to the enemy. Of all others, a studious life is the least tiresome: it makes us easy to ourselves and to others, and gains us both friends and reputation.  HE THAT SETS UP HIS REST UPON CONTINGENCIES SHALL NEVER BE QUIET. Never pronounce any man happy that depends upon fortune for his happiness; for nothing can be more preposterous than to place the good of a reasonable creature in unreasonable things. If I have lost any thing, it was adventitious; and the less money, the less trouble; the less favor, the less envy; nay, even in those cases that put us out of their wits, it is not the loss itself, but the opinion of the loss, that troubles us. It is a common mistake to account those things necessary that are superfluous, and to depend upon fortune for the felicity of life, which arises only from virtue. There is no trusting to her smiles; the sea swells and rages in a moment, and the ships are swallowed at night, in the very place where they sported themselves in the morning. And fortune has the same power over princes that it has over empires, over nations that it has over cities, and the same power over cities that it has over private men. Where is that estate that may not be followed upon the heel with famine and beggary? that dignity which the next moment may not be laid in the dust? that kingdom that is secure from desolation and ruin? The period of all things is at hand, as well that which casts out the fortunate as the other that delivers the unhappy; and that which may fall out at any time may fall out this very day. What shall come to pass I know not, but what may come to pass I know: so that I will despair of nothing, but expect everything; and whatsoever Providence remits is clear gain. Every moment, if it spares me, deceives me; and yet in some sort it does not deceive me; for though I know that any thing may happen, yet I know likewise that everything will not. I will hope the best, and provide for the worst. Methinks we should not find so much fault with Fortune for her inconstancy when we ourselves suffer a change every moment that we live; only other changes make more noise, and this steals upon us like the shadow upon a dial, every jot as certainly, but more insensibly. The burning of Lyons may serve to show us that we are never safe, and to arm us against all surprises. The terror of it must needs be great, for the calamity is almost without example. If it had been fired by an enemy, the flame would have left some further mischief to have been done by the soldiers; but to be wholly consumed, we have not heard of many earthquakes so pernicious: so many rarities to be destroyed in one night; and in the depth of peace to suffer an outrage beyond the extremity of war; who would believe it? but twelve hours betwixt so fair a city and none at all! It was laid in ashes in less time than it would require to tell the story. To stand unshaken in such a calamity is hardly to be expected, and our wonder can but be equal to our grief. Let this accident teach us to provide against all possibilities that fall within the power of fortune. All external things are under her dominion: one while she calls our hands to her assistance; another while she contents herself with her own force, and destroys us with mischiefs of which we cannot find the author. No time, place, or condition, is excepted; she makes our very pleasures painful to us; she makes war upon us in the depth of peace, and turns the means of our security into an occasion of fear; she turns a friend into an enemy, and makes a foe of a companion; we suffer the effects of war without any adversary; and rather than fail, our felicity shall be the cause of our destruction. Lest we should either forget or neglect her power, every day produces something extraordinary. She persecutes the most temperate with sickness, the strongest constitutions with the phthisis; she brings the innocent to punishment, and the most retired she assaults with tumults. Those glories that have grown up with many ages, with infinite labor and expense, and under the favor of many auspicious providences, one day scatters and brings to nothing. He that pronounced a day, nay, an hour, sufficient for the destruction of the greatest empire, might have fallen to a moment. It were some comfort yet to the frailty of mankind and of human affairs, if things might but decay as slowly as they rise; but they grow by degrees, and they fall to ruin in an instant. There is no felicity in anything either private or public; men, nations, and cities, have all their fates and periods; our very entertainments are not without terror, and our calamity rises there where we least expect it. Those kingdoms that stood the shock both of foreign wars and civil, come to destruction without the sight of an enemy. Nay, we are to dread our peace and felicity more than violence, because we are here taken unprovided; unless in a state of peace we do the duty of men in war, and say to ourselves, Whatsoever may be, will be. I am to-day safe and happy in the love of my country; I am to-morrow banished: to-day in pleasure, peace, health; to-morrow broken upon a wheel, led in triumph, and in the agony of sickness. Let us therefore prepare for a shipwreck in the port, and for a tempest in a calm. One violence drives me from my country, another ravishes that from me; and that very place where a man can hardly pass this day for a crowd may be to-morrow a desert. Wherefore let us set before our eyes the whole condition of human nature, and consider as well what may happen as what commonly does. The way to make future calamities easy to us in the sufferance, is to make them familiar to us in the contemplation. How many cities in Asia, Achaia, Assyria, Macedonia, have been swallowed up by earthquakes? nay, whole countries are lost, and large provinces laid under water; but time brings all things to an end; for all the works of mortals are mortal; all possessions and their possessors are uncertain and perishable; and what wonder is it to lose anything at any time, when we must one day lose all? That which we call our own is but lent us; and what we have received gratis we must return without complaint. That which Fortune gives us this hour she may take away the next; and he that trusts to her favors, shall either find himself deceived, or if he be not, he will at least be troubled, because he may be so. There is no defence in walls, fortifications, and engines, against the power of fortune; we must provide ourselves within, and when we are safe there, we are invincible; we may be battered, but not taken. She throws her gifts among us, and we sweat and scuffle for them, never considering how few are the better for that which is expected by all. Some are transported with what they get; others tormented for what they miss; and many times there is a leg or an arm broken in a contest for a counter. She gives us honors, riches, favors, only to take them away again, either by violence or treachery: so that they frequently turn to the damage of the receiver. She throws out baits for us, and sets traps as we do for birds and beasts; her bounties are snares and lime-twigs to us; we think that we take, but we are taken. If they had any thing in them that was substantial, they would some time or other fill and quiet us; but they serve only to provoke our appetite without anything more than pomp and show to allay it. But the best of it is, if a man cannot mend his fortune, he may yet mend his manners, and put himself so far out of her reach, that whether she gives or takes, it shall be all one to us; for we are neither the greater for the one, nor the less for the other. We call this a dark room, or that a light one; when it is in itself neither the one nor the other, but only as the day and the night render it. And so it is in riches, strength of body, beauty, honor, command: and likewise in pain, sickness, banishment, death: which are in themselves middle and indifferent things, and only good or bad as they are influenced by virtue. To weep, lament, and groan, is to renounce our duty; and it is the same weakness on the other side to exult and rejoice. I would rather make my fortune than expect it; being neither depressed with her injuries, nor dazzled with her favors. When Zeno was told, that all his goods were drowned; “Why then,” says he, “Fortune has a mind to make me a philosopher.” It is a great matter for a man to advance his mind above her threats or flatteries; for he that has once gotten the better of her is safe forever. It is some comfort yet to the unfortunate, that great men lie under the lash for company; and that death spares the palace no more than the cottage, and that whoever is above me has a power also above him. Do we not daily see funerals without trouble, princes deposed, countries depopulated, towns sacked; without so much as thinking how soon it may be our own case? whereas, if we would but prepare and arm ourselves against the iniquities of fortune, we should never be surprised. When we see any man banished, beggared, tortured, we are to account, that though the mischief fell upon another, it was levelled at us. What wonder is it if, of so many thousands of dangers that are constantly hovering about us, one comes to hit us at last? That which befalls any man, may befall every man; and then it breaks the force of a present calamity to provide against the future. Whatsoever our lot is, we must bear it: as suppose it be contumely, cruelty, fire, sword, pains, diseases, or a prey to wild beasts; there is no struggling, nor any remedy but moderation. It is to no purpose to bewail any part of our life, when life itself is miserable throughout; and the whole flux of it only a course of transition from one misfortune to another. A man may as well wonder that he should be cold in winter, sick at sea, or have his bones clatter together in a wagon, as at the encounter of ill accidents and crosses in the passage of human life; and it is in vain to run away from fortune, as if there were any hiding-place wherein she could not find us; or to expect any quiet from her; for she makes life a perpetual state of war, without so much as any respite or truce. This we may conclude upon, that her empire is but imaginary, and that whosoever serves her, makes himself a voluntary slave; for “the things that are often contemned by the inconsiderate, and always by the wise, are in themselves neither good nor evil:” as pleasure and pains; prosperity and adversity; which can only operate upon our outward condition, without any proper and necessary effect upon the mind.   A SENSUAL LIFE IS A MISERABLE LIFE. The sensuality that we here treat of falls naturally under the head of luxury; which extends to all the excesses of gluttony, lust, effeminacy of manners; and, in short, to whatsoever concerns the overgreat care of the carcass. To begin now with the pleasures of the palate, (which deal with us like Egyptian thieves, that strangle those they embrace), what shall we say of the luxury of Nomentanus and Apicius, that entertained their very souls in the kitchen: they have the choicest music for their ears; the most diverting spectacles for their eyes; the choicest variety of meats and drinks for their palates. What is all this, I say, but a merry madness? It is true, they have their delights, but not without heavy and anxious thoughts, even in their very enjoyments, beside that, they are followed with repentance, and their frolics are little more than the laughter of so many people out of their wits. Their felicities are full of disquiet, and neither sincere nor well grounded: but they have need of one pleasure to support another; and of new prayers to forgive the errors of their former. Their life must needs be wretched that get with great pains what they keep with greater.  One diversion overtakes another; hope excites hope; ambition begets ambition; so that they only change the matter of their miseries, without seeking any end of them; and shall never be without either prosperous or unhappy causes of disquiet. What if a body might have all the pleasures in the world for the asking? who would so much unman himself, as by accepting of them, to desert his soul, and become a perpetual slave to his senses? Those false and miserable palates, that judge of meats by the price and difficulty, not by the healthfulness of taste, they vomit that they may eat, and they eat that they may fetch it up again. They cross the seas for rarities, and when they have swallowed them, they will not so much as give them time to digest. Wheresoever Nature has placed men, she has provided them aliment: but we rather choose to irritate hunger by expense than to allay it at an easier rate. What is it that we plow the seas for; or arm ourselves against men and beasts? To what end do we toil, and labor, and pile bags upon bags? We may enlarge our fortunes, but we cannot our bodies; so that it does but spill and run over, whatsoever we take more than we can hold. Our forefathers (by the force of whose virtues we are now supported in our vices) lived every jot as well as we, when they provided and dressed their own meat with their own hands; lodged upon the ground, and were not as yet come to the vanity of gold and gems; when they swore by their earthen gods, and kept their oath, though they died for it. Did not our consuls live more happily when they cooked their own meat with those victorious hands that had conquered so many enemies and won so many laurels? Did they not live more happily, I say, than our Apicius (that corrupter of youth, and plague of the age he lived in) who, after he had spent a prodigious fortune upon his belly, poisoned himself for fear of starving, when he had yet , crowns in his coffers? which may serve to show us, that it is the mind, and not the sum, that makes any man rich; when Apicius with all his treasure counted himself in a state of beggary, and took poison to avoid that condition, which another would have prayed for. But why do we call it poison, which was the wholesomest draught of his life? His daily gluttony was poison rather, both to himself and others. His ostentation of it was intolerable; and so was the infinite pains he took to mislead others by his example, who went even fast enough of themselves without driving. It is a shame for a man to place his felicity in those entertainments and appetites that are stronger in brutes. Do not beasts eat with a better stomach? Have they not more satisfaction in their lusts? And they have not only a quicker relish of their pleasures, but they enjoy them without either scandal or remorse. If sensuality were happiness, beasts were happier than men; but human felicity is lodged in the soul, not in the flesh. They that deliver themselves up to luxury are still either tormented with too little, or oppressed with too much; and equally miserable, by being either deserted or overwhelmed: they are like men in a dangerous sea; one while cast a-dry upon a rock, and another while swallowed up in a whirlpool; and all this from the mistake of not distinguishing good from evil. The huntsman, that with which labor and hazard takes a wild beast, runs as great a risk afterwards in the keeping of him; for many times he tears out the throat of his master; and it is the same thing with inordinate pleasures: the more in number, and the greater they are, the more general and absolute a slave is the servant of them. Let the common people pronounce him as happy as they please, he pays his liberty for his delights, and sells himself for what he buys. Let any man take a view of our kitchens, the number of our cooks, and the variety of our meats; will he not wonder to see so much provision made for one belly? We have as many diseases as we have cooks or meats; and the service of the appetite is the study now in vogue. To say nothing of our trains of lackeys, and our troops of caterers and sewers: Good God! that ever one belly should employ so many people! How nauseous and fulsome are the surfeits that follow these excesses? Simple meats are out of fashion, and all are collected into one; so that the cook does the office of the stomach; nay, and of the teeth too; for the meat looks as if it were chewed beforehand: here is the luxury of all tastes in one dish, and liker a vomit than a soup. From these compounded dishes arise compounded diseases, which require compounded medicines. It is the same thing with our minds that it is with our tables; simple vices are curable by simple counsels, but a general dissolution of manners is hardly overcome; we are overrun with a public as well as with a private madness. The physicians of old understood little more than the virtue of some herbs to stop blood, or heal a wound; and their firm and healthful bodies needed little more before they were corrupted by luxury and pleasure; and when it came to that once, their business was not to allay hunger, but to provoke it by a thousand inventions and sauces. That which was aliment to a craving stomach is become a burden to a full one. From hence came paleness, trembling, and worse effects from crudities than famine; a weakness in the joints, the belly stretched, suffusion of choler, the torpor of the nerves, and a palpitation of the heart. To say nothing of megrims, torments of the eyes and ears, head-ache, gout, scurvy, several sorts of fevers and putrid ulcers, with other diseases that are but the punishment of luxury. So long as our bodies were hardened with labor, or tired with exercise or hunting, our food was plain and simple; many dishes have made many diseases. It is an ill thing for a man not to know the measure of his stomach, nor to consider that men do many things in their drink that they are ashamed of sober; drunkenness being nothing else but a voluntary madness. It emboldens men to do all sorts of mischiefs; it both irritates wickedness and discovers it; it does not make men vicious, but it shows them to be so. It was in a drunken fit that Alexander killed Clytus. It makes him that is insolent prouder, him that is cruel fiercer, it takes away all shame. He that is peevish breaks out presently into ill words and blows. The lecher, without any regard to decency or scandal, turns up his whore in the market-place. A man’s tongue trips, his head runs round, he staggers in his pace. To say nothing of the crudities and diseases that follow upon this distemper, consider the public mischiefs it has done. How many warlike nations and strong cities, that have stood invincible to attacks and sieges, has drunkenness overcome! Is it not a great honor to drink the company dead? a magnificent virtue to swallow more wine than the rest, and yet at last to be outdone by a hogshead? What shall we say of those men that invert the offices of day and night? as if our eyes were only given us to make use of in the dark? Is it day? “It is time to go to bed.” Is it night? “It is time to rise.” Is it toward morning? “Let us go to supper.” When other people lie down they rise, and lie till the next night to digest the debauch of the day before. It is an argument of clownery, to do as other people do. Luxury steals upon us by degrees; first, it shows itself in a more than ordinary care of our bodies, it slips next into the furniture of our houses; and it gets then into the fabric, curiosity, and expense of the house itself. It appears, lastly, in the fantastical excesses of our tables. We change and shuffle our meats, confound our sauces, serve that in first that used to be last, and value our dishes, not for the taste, but for the rarity. Nay, we are so delicate, that we must be told when we are to eat or drink; when we are hungry or weary; and we cherish some vices as proofs and arguments of our happiness. The most miserable mortals are they that deliver themselves up to their palates, or to their lusts: the pleasure is short and turns presently nauseous, and the end of it is either shame or repentance. It is a brutal entertainment, and unworthy of a man, to place his felicity in the service of his senses. As to the wrathful, the contentious, the ambitious, though the distemper be great, the offence has yet something in it that is manly; but the basest of prostitutes are those that dedicate themselves wholly to lust; what with their hopes and fears, anxiety of thought, and perpetual disquiets, they are never well, full nor fasting. What a deal of business is now made about our houses and diet, which was at first both obvious and of little expense? Luxury led the way, and we have employed our wits in the aid of our vices. First we desired superfluities, our next step was to wickedness, and, in conclusion, we delivered up our minds to our bodies, and so became slaves to our appetites, which before were our servants, and are now become our masters. What was it that brought us to the extravagance of embroideries, perfumes, tire-women, etc. We passed the bounds of Nature, and launched out into superfluities; insomuch, that it is now-a-days only for beggars and clowns to content themselves with what is sufficient; our luxury makes us insolent and mad. We take upon us like princes, and fly out for every trifle, as though there were life and death in the case. What a madness is it for a man to lay out an estate upon a table or a cabinet, a patrimony upon a pain of pendants, and to inflame the price of curiosities according to the hazard either of breaking or losing of them? To wear garments that will neither defend a woman’s body, nor her modesty: so thin that one could make a conscience of swearing she were naked: for she hardly shows more in the privacies of her amour than in public? How long shall we covet and oppress, enlarge our possessions, and account that too little for one man which was formerly enough for a nation? And our luxury is as insatiable as our avarice. Where is that lake, that sea, that forest, that spot of land; that is not ransacked to gratify our palate? The very earth is burdened with our buildings; not a river, not a mountain, escapes us. Oh, that there should be such boundless desires in our little bodies! Would not fewer lodgings serve us? We lie but in one, and where we are not, that is not properly ours. What with our hooks, snares, nets, dogs, etc., we are at war with all living creatures; and nothing comes amiss but that which is either too cheap, or too common; and all this is to gratify a fantastical palate. Our avarice, our ambition, our lusts, are insatiable; we enlarge our possessions, swell our families, we rifle sea and land for matter of ornament and luxury. A bull contents himself with one meadow, and one forest is enough for a thousand elephants; but the little body of a man devours more than all other living creatures. We do not eat to satisfy hunger, but ambition; we are dead while we are alive, and our houses are so much our tombs, that a man might write our epitaphs upon our very doors. A voluptuous person, in fine, can neither be a good man, a good patriot, nor a good friend; for he is transported with his appetites, without considering, that the lot of man is the law of Nature. A good man (like a good soldier) will stand his ground, receive wounds, glory in his scars, and in death itself love his master for whom he falls; with that divine precept always in his mind, “Follow good:” whereas he that complains, laments, and groans, must yield nevertheless, and do his duty though in spite of his heart. Now, what a madness is it for a man to choose rather to be lugged than to follow, and vainly to contend with the calamities of human life? Whatsoever is laid upon us by necessity, we should receive generously; for it is foolish to strive with what we cannot avoid. We are born subjects, and to obey God is perfect liberty. He that does this shall be free, safe, and quiet: all his actions shall succeed to his wish: and what can any man desire more than to want nothing from without, and to have all things desirable within himself? Pleasures do but weaken our minds, and send us for our support to Fortune, who gives us money only as the wages of slavery. We must stop our eyes and our ears. Ulysses had but one rock to fear, but human life has many. Every city, nay, every man, is one; and there is no trusting even to our nearest friends. Deliver me from the superstition of taking those things which are light and vain for felicities.  . AVARICE AND AMBITION ARE INSATIABLE AND RESTLESS. The man that would be truly rich must not increase his fortune, but retrench his appetites: for riches are not only superfluous, but mean, and little more to the possessor than to the looker-on. What is the end of ambition and avarice, when at best we are but stewards of what we falsely call our own? All those things that we pursue with so much hazard and expense of blood, as well to keep as to get, for which we break faith and friendship, what are they but the mere deposita of Fortune? and not ours, but already inclining toward a new master. There is nothing our own but that which we give to ourselves, and of which we have a certain and an inexpugnable possession. Avarice is so insatiable, that it is not in the power of liberality to content it; and our desires are so boundless, that whatever we get is but in the way to getting more without end: and so long as we are solicitous for the increase of wealth, we lose the true use of it; and spend our time in putting out, calling in, and passing our accounts, without any substantial benefit, either to the world or to ourselves. What is the difference betwixt old men and children? the one cries for nuts and apples, and the other for gold and silver: the one sets up courts of justice, hears and determines, acquits and condemns, in jest; the other in earnest: the one makes houses of clay, the other of marble: so that the works of old men are nothing in the world but the progress and improvement of children’s errors; and they are to be admonished and punished too like children, not in revenge for injuries received, but as a correction of injuries done, and to make them give over. There is some substance yet in gold and silver; but as to judgments and statutes, procuration and continuance-money, these are only the visions and dreams of avarice. Throw a crust of bread to a dog, he takes it open-mouthed, swallows it whole, and presently gapes for more: just so do we with the gifts of Fortune; down they go without chewing, and we are immediately ready for another chop. But what has avarice now to do with gold and silver, that is so much outdone by curiosities of a far greater value? Let us no longer complain that there was not a heavier load laid upon those precious metals, or that they were not buried deep enough, when we have found out ways by wax and parchments, and by bloody usurious contracts, to undo one another. It is remarkable, that Providence has given us all things for our advantage near at hand; but iron, gold, and silver, (being both the instrument of blood and slaughter, and the price of it) Nature has hidden in the bowels of the earth. There is no avarice without some punishment, over and above that which it is to itself. How miserable is it in the desire! how miserable even in the attaining of our ends! For money is a greater torment in the possession than it is in the pursuit. The fear of losing it is a great trouble, the loss of it a greater, and it is made a greater yet by opinion. Nay, even in the case of no direct loss at all, the covetous man loses what he does not get. It is true, the people call the rich man a happy man, and wish themselves in his condition; but can any condition be worse than that which carries vexation and envy along with it? Neither is any man to boast of his fortune, his herds of cattle, his number of slaves, his lands and palaces; for comparing that which he has to that which he further covets, he is a beggar. No man can possess all things, but any man may contemn them; and the contempt of riches is the nearest way to the gaining of them. Some magistrates are made for money, and those commonly are bribed with money. We are all turned merchants, and look not into the quality of things, but into the price of them; for reward we are pious, and for reward again we are impious. We are honest so long as we may thrive upon it; but if the devil himself gives better wages, we change our party. Our parents have trained us up into an admiration of gold and silver, and the love of it is grown up with us to that degree that when we would show our gratitude to Heaven, we make presents of those metals. This it is that makes poverty look like a curse and a reproach; and the poets help it forward; the chariot of the sun must be all of gold; the best of times must be the Golden Age, and thus they turn the greatest misery of mankind into the greatest blessings. Neither does avarice make us only unhappy in ourselves, but malevolent also to mankind. The soldier wishes for war; the husbandman would have his corn dear; the lawyer prays for dissension; the physician for a sickly year; he that deals in curiosities, for luxury and excess, for he makes up his fortunes out of the corruptions of the age. High winds and public conflagrations make work for the carpenter and bricklayer, and one man lives by the loss of another; some few, perhaps, have the fortune to be detected, but they are all wicked alike. A great plague makes work for the sexton; and, in one word, whosoever gains by the dead has not much kindness for the living. Demades of Athens condemned a fellow that sold necessaries for funerals, upon proof that he wished to make himself a fortune by his trade, which could not be but by a great mortality; but perhaps he did not so much desire to have many customers, as to sell dear, and buy cheap; besides, that all of that trade might have been condemned as well as he. Whatsoever whets our appetites, flatters and depresses the mind, and, by dilating it, weakens it; first blowing it up, and then filling and deluding it with vanity. To proceed now from the most prostitute of all vices, sensuality and avarice, to that which passes in the world for the most generous, the thirst of glory and dominion. If they that run mad after wealth and honor, could but look into the hearts of them that have already gained these points, how would it startle them to see those hideous cares and crimes that wait upon ambitious greatness: all those acquisitions that dazzle the eyes of the vulgar are but false pleasures, slippery and uncertain. They are achieved with labor, and the very guard of them is painful. Ambition puffs us up with vanity and wind: and we are equally troubled either to see any body before us, or nobody behind us; so that we lie under a double envy; for whosoever envies another is also envied himself. What matters it how far Alexander extended his conquests, if he was not yet satisfied with what he had? Every man wants as much as he covets; and it is lost labor to pour into a vessel that will never be full. He that had subdued so many princes and nations, upon the killing of Clytus (one friend) and the loss of Hyphestion (another) delivered himself up to anger and sadness; and when he was master of the world, he was yet a slave to his passions. Look into Cyrus, Cambyses, and the whole Persian line, and you shall not find so much as one man of them that died satisfied with what he had gotten. Ambition aspires from great things to greater; and propounds matters even impossible, when it has once arrived at things beyond expectation. It is a kind of dropsy; the more a man drinks, the more he covets. Let any man but observe the tumults and the crowds that attend palaces; what affronts must we endure to be admitted, and how much greater when we are in! The passage to virtue is fair, but the way to greatness is craggy and it stands not only upon a precipice, but upon ice too; and yet it is a hard matter to convince a great man that his station is slippery, or to prevail with him not to depend upon his greatness; but all superfluities are hurtful. A rank crop lays the corn; too great a burden of fruit breaks the bough; and our minds may be as well overcharged with an immoderate happiness. Nay, though we ourselves would be at rest, our fortune will not suffer it: the way that leads to honor and riches leads to troubles; and we find the source of our sorrows in the very objects of our delights. What joy is there in feasting and luxury; in ambition and a crowd of clients; in the arms of a mistress, or in the vanity of an unprofitable knowledge? These short and false pleasures deceive us, and, like drunkenness, revenge the jolly madness of one hour with the nauseous and sad repentance of many. Ambition is like a gulf: everything is swallowed up in it and buried, beside the dangerous consequences of it; for that which one has taken from all, may be easily taken away again by all from one. It was not either virtue or reason, but the mad love of a deceitful greatness, that animated Pompey in his wars, either abroad or at home. What was it but his ambition that hurried him to Spain, Africa, and elsewhere, when he was too great already in everybody’s opinion but his own? And the same motive had Julius Cæsar, who could not, even then, brook a superior himself, when the commonwealth had submitted unto two already. Nor was it any instinct of virtue that pushed on Marius, who at the head of an army was himself led on under the command of ambition: but he came at last to the deserved fate of other wicked men, and to drink himself of the same cup that he had filled to others. We impose upon our reason, when we suffer ourselves to be transported with titles; for we know that they are nothing but a more glorious sound; and so for ornaments and gildings, though there be a lustre to dazzle our eyes, our understanding tells us that it is only outside, and the matter under it is only coarse and common. I will never envy those that the people call great and happy. A sound mind is not to be shaken with a popular and vain applause; nor is it in the power of their pride to disturb the state of our happiness. An honest man is known now-a-days by the dust he raises upon the way, and it is become a point of honor to overrun people, and keep all at a distance; though he that is put out of the way may perchance be happier than he that takes it. He that would exercise a power profitable to himself, and grievous to nobody else, let him practice it upon his passion. They that have burnt cities, otherwise invincible, driven armies before them, and bathed themselves in human blood, after they have overcome all open enemies, they have been vanquished by their lust, by their cruelty, and without any resistance. Alexander was possessed with the madness of laying kingdoms waste. He began with Greece, where he was brought up; and there he quarried himself upon that in it which was the best; he enslaved Lacedemon, and silenced Athens: nor was he content with the destruction of those towns which his father Philip had either conquered or bought; but he made himself the enemy of human nature; and, like the worst of beasts, he worried what he could not eat. Felicity is an unquiet thing; it torments itself, and puzzles the brain. It makes some people ambitious, others luxurious; it puffs up some, and softens others; only (as it is with wine) some heads bear it better than others; but it dissolves all. Greatness stands upon a precipice: and if prosperity carries a man never so little beyond his poise, it overbears and dashes him to pieces. It is a rare thing for a man in a great fortune to lay down his happiness gently; it being a common fate for a man to sink under the weight of those felicities that raise him. How many of the nobility did Marius bring down to herdsmen and other mean offices! Nay, in the very moment of our despising servants, we may be made so ourselves.  I. HOPE AND FEAR ARE THE BANE OF HUMAN LIFE. No man can be said to be perfectly happy that runs the risk of disappointment: which is the case of every man that fears or hopes for anything. For hope and fear, how distant soever they may seem to be the one from the other, they are both of them yet coupled in the same chain, as the guard and the prisoner; and the one treads upon the heels of the other. The reason of this is obvious, for they are passions that look forward, and are ever solicitous for the future; only hope is the more plausible weakness of the two, which in truth, upon the main, are inseparable; for the one cannot be without the other: but where the hope is stronger than the fear, or the fear than the hope, we call it the one or the other; for without fear it were no longer hope, but certainty; as without hope it were no longer fear but despair. We may come to understand whether our disputes are vain or not, if we do but consider that we are either troubled about the present, the future or both. If the present, it is easy to judge, and the future is uncertain. It is a foolish thing to be miserable beforehand for fear of misery to come; for a man loses the present, which he might enjoy, in expectation of the future: nay, the fear of losing anything is as bad as the loss itself. I will be as prudent as I can, but not timorous or careless; and I will bethink myself, and forecast what inconveniences may happen before they come. It is true, a man may fear, and yet not be fearful; which is no more than to have the affection of fear without the vice of it; but yet a frequent admittance of it runs into a habit. It is a shameful and an unmanly thing to be doubtful, timorous, and uncertain; to set one step forward, and another backward; and to be irresolute. Can there be any man so fearful, that had not rather fall once than hang always in suspense? Our miseries are endless, if we stand in fear of all possibilities; the best way, in such a case, is to drive out one nail with another, and a little to qualify fear with hope; which may serve to palliate a misfortune; though not to cure it. There is not anything that we fear, which is so certain to come, as it is certain that many things which we do fear will not come; but we are loth to oppose our credulity when it begins to move us, and so to bring our fear to the test. Well! but “what if the thing we fear should come to pass?” Perhaps it will be the better for us. Suppose it be death itself, why may it not prove the glory of my life? Did not poison make Socrates famous? and was not Cato’s sword a great part of his honor? “Do we fear any misfortune to befall us?” We are not presently sure that it will happen. How many deliverances have come unlooked for? and how many mischiefs that we looked for have never come to pass? It is time enough to lament when it comes, and, in the interim, to promise ourselves the best. What do I know but something or other may delay or divert it? Some have escaped out of the fire; others, when a house has fallen over their head, have received no hurt: one man has been saved when a sword was at his throat; another has been condemned, and outlived his headsman: so that ill-fortune, we see, as well as good, has her levities; peradventure it will be, peradventure not; and until it comes to pass, we are not sure of it: we do many times take words in a worse sense than they were intended, and imagine things to be worse taken than they are. It is time enough to bear a misfortune when it comes, without anticipating it. He that would deliver himself from all apprehensions of the future, let him first take for granted, that all fears will fall upon him; and then examine and measure the evil that he fears, which he will find to be neither great nor long. Beside, that the ills which he fears he may suffer, he suffers in the very fear of them. As in the symptoms of an approaching disease, a man shall find himself lazy and listless: a weariness in his limbs, with a yawning and shuddering all over him; so it is in the case of a weak mind, it fancies misfortunes, and makes a man wretched before his time. Why should I torment myself at present with what, perhaps, may fall out fifty years hence? This humor is a kind of voluntary disease, and an industrious contrivance of our own unhappiness, to complain of an affliction that we do not feel. Some are not only moved with grief itself, but with the mere opinion of it; as children will start at a shadow, or at the sight of a deformed person. If we stand in fear of violence from a powerful enemy, it is some comfort to us, that whosoever makes himself terrible to others is not without fear himself: the least noise makes a lion start; and the fiercest of beasts, whatsoever enrages them, makes them tremble too: a shadow, a voice, an unusual odor, rouses them. The things most to be feared I take to be of three kinds; want, sickness, and those violences that may be imposed upon us by a strong hand. The last of these has the greatest force, because it comes attended with noise and tumult; whereas the incommodities of poverty and diseases are more natural, and steal upon us in silence, without any external circumstances of horror: but the other marches in pomp, with fire and sword, gibbets, racks, hooks; wild beasts to devour us; stakes to impale us; engines to tear us to pieces; pitched bags to burn us in, and a thousand other exquisite inventions of cruelty. No wonder then, if that be the most dreadful to us that presents itself in so many uncouth shapes; and by the very solemnity is rendered the most formidable. The more instruments of bodily pain the executioner shows us, the more frightful he makes himself: for many a man that would have encountered death in any generous form, with resolution enough, is yet overcome with the manner of it. As for the calamities of hunger and thirst, inward ulcers, scorching fevers, tormenting fits of the stone, I look upon these miseries to be at least as grievous as any of the rest; only they do not so much affect the fancy, because they lie out of sight. Some people talk high of danger at a distance; but (like cowards) when the executioner comes to do his duty, and show us the fire, the ax, the scaffold, and death at hand, their courage fails them upon the very pinch, when they have most need of it. Sickness, (I hope) captivity, fire, are no new things to us; the fall of houses, funerals, and conflagrations, are every day before our eyes. The man that I supped with last night is dead before morning; why should I wonder then, seeing so many fall about me, to be hit at last myself? What can be greater madness than to cry out, “Who would have dreamed of this?” And why not, I beseech you? Where is that estate that may not be reduced to beggary? that dignity which may not be followed with banishment, disgrace, and extreme contempt? that kingdom that may not suddenly fall to ruin; change its master, and be depopulated? that prince that may not pass the hand of a common hangman? That which is one man’s fortune may be another’s; but the foresight of calamities to come breaks the violence of them.  . IT IS ACCORDING TO THE TRUE OR FALSE ESTIMATE OF THINGS THAT WE ARE HAPPY OR MISERABLE. How many things are there that the fancy makes terrible by night, which the day turns into ridiculous! What is there in labor, or in death, that a man should be afraid of? They are much slighter in act than in contemplation; and we may contemn them, but we will not: so that it is not because they are hard that we dread them, but they are hard because we are first afraid of them. Pains, and other violences of Fortune, are the same thing to us that goblins are to children: we are more scared with them than hurt. We take up our opinions upon trust, and err for company, still judging that to be best that has most competitors. We make a false calculation of matters, because we advise with opinion, and not with Nature; and this misleads us to a higher esteem for riches, honor, and power, than they are worth: we have been used to admire and recommend them, and a private error is quickly turned into a public. The greatest and the smallest things are equally hard to be comprehended; we account many things great, for want of understanding what effectually is so: and we reckon other things to be small, which we find frequently to be of the highest value. Vain things only move vain minds. The accidents that we so much boggle at are not terrible in themselves, but they are made so by our infirmities; but we consult rather what we hear than what we feel, without examining, opposing, or discussing the things we fear; so that we either stand still and tremble, or else directly run for it, as those troops did, that, upon the raising of the dust, took a flock of sheep for the enemy. When the body and mind are corrupted, it is no wonder if all things prove intolerable; and not because they are so in truth, but because we are dissolute and foolish: for we are infatuated to such a degree, that, betwixt the common madness of men, and that which falls under the care of the physician, there is but this difference, the one labors of a disease, and the other of a false opinion. The Stoics hold, that all those torments that commonly draw from us groans and ejaculations, are in themselves trivial and contemptible. But these high-flown expressions apart (how true soever) let us discourse the point at the rate of ordinary men, and not make ourselves miserable before our time; for the things we apprehend to be at hand may possibly never come to pass. Some things trouble us more than they should, other things sooner; and some things again disorder us that ought not to trouble us at all; so that we either enlarge, or create, or anticipate our disquiets. For the first part, let it rest as a matter in controversy; for that which I account light, another perhaps will judge insupportable! One man laughs under the lash, and another whines for a fillip. How sad a calamity is poverty to one man, which to another appears rather desirable than inconvenient? For the poor man, who has nothing to lose, has nothing to fear: and he that would enjoy himself to the satisfaction of his soul, must be either poor indeed, or at least look as if he were so. Some people are extremely dejected with sickness and pain; whereas Epicurus blessed his fate with his last breath, in the acutest torments of the stone imaginable. And so for banishment, which to one man is so grievous, and yet to another is no more than a bare change of place: a thing that we do every day for our health, pleasure, nay, and upon the account even of common business. How terrible is death to one man, which to another appears the greatest providence in nature, even toward all ages and conditions! It is the wish of some, the relief of many, and the end of all. It sets the slave at liberty, carries the banished man home, and places all mortals upon the same level: insomuch, that life itself were a punishment without it. When I see tyrants, tortures, violences, the prospect of death is a consolation to me, and the only remedy against the injuries of life. Nay, so great are our mistakes in the true estimate of things, that we have hardly done any thing that we have not had reason to wish undone; and we have found the things we feared to be more desirable than those we coveted. Our very prayers have been more pernicious than the curses of our enemies; and we must pray to have our former prayers forgiven. Where is the wise man that wishes to himself the wishes of his mother, nurse, or his tutor; the worst of enemies, with the intention of the best of friends. We are undone if their prayers be heard; and it is our duty to pray that they may not; for they are no other than well-meaning execrations. They take evil for good, and one wish fights with another: give me rather the contempt of all those things whereof they wish me the greatest plenty. We are equally hurt by some that pray for us, and by others that curse us: the one imprints in us a false fear, and the other does us mischief by a mistake: so that it is no wonder if mankind be miserable, when we are brought up from the very cradle under the imprecations of our parents. We pray for trifles, without so much as thinking of the greatest blessings; and we are not ashamed many times to ask God for that which we should blush to own to our neighbor. It is with us as with an innocent that my father had in his family; she fell blind on a sudden, and nobody could persuade her she was blind. “She could not endure the house,” she cried, “it was so dark,” and was still calling to go abroad. That which we laughed at in her we find to be true in ourselves, we are covetous and ambitious; but the world shall never bring us to acknowledge it, and we impute it to the place: nay, we are the worse of the two; for that blind fool called for a guide, and we wander about without one. It is a hard matter to cure those that will not believe they are sick. We are ashamed to admit a master, and we are too old to learn. Vice still goes before virtue: so that we have two works to do: we must cast off the one, and learn the other. By one evil we make way to another, and only seek things to be avoided, or those of which we are soon weary. That which seemed too much when we wished for it, proves too little when we have it; and it is not, as some imagine, that felicity is greedy, but it is little and narrow, and cannot satisfy us. That which we take to be very high at a distance, we find to be but low when we come at it. And the business is, we do not understand the true state of things: we are deceived by rumors; when we have gained the thing we aimed at, we find it to be either ill or empty; or perchance less than we expect, or otherwise perhaps great, but not good.   THE BLESSINGS OF TEMPERANCE AND MODERATION. There is not anything that is necessary to us but we have it either cheap or gratis: and this is the provision that our heavenly Father has made for us, whose bounty was never wanting to our needs. It is true the belly craves and calls upon us, but then a small matter contents it: a little bread and water is sufficient, and all the rest is but superfluous. He that lives according to reason shall never be poor, and he that governs his life by opinion shall never be rich: for nature is limited, but fancy is boundless. As for meat, clothes, and lodging, a little feeds the body, and as little covers it; so that if mankind would only attend human nature, without gaping at superfluities, a cook would be found as needless as a soldier: for we may have necessaries upon very easy terms; whereas we put ourselves to great pains for excesses. When we are cold, we may cover ourselves with skins of beasts; and, against violent heats, we have natural grottoes; or with a few osiers and a little clay we may defend ourselves against all seasons. Providence has been kinder to us than to leave us to live by our wits, and to stand in need of invention and arts. It is only pride and curiosity that involve us in difficulties: if nothing will serve a man but rich clothes and furniture, statues and plate, a numerous train of servants, and the rarities of all nations, it is not Fortune’s fault, but his own, that he is not satisfied: for his desires are insatiable, and this is not a thirst, but a disease; and if he were master of the whole world, he would be still a beggar. It is the mind that makes us rich and happy, in what condition soever we are; and money signifies no more to it than it does to the gods. If the religion be sincere, no matter for the ornaments it is only luxury and avarice that make poverty grievous to us; for it is a very small matter that does our business; and when we have provided against cold, hunger, and thirst, all the rest is but vanity and excess: and there is no need of expense upon foreign delicacies, or the artifices of the kitchen. What is he the worse for poverty that despises these things? nay, is he not rather the better for it, because he is not able to go to the price of them? for he is kept sound whether he will or not: and that which a man cannot do, looks many times as if he would not. When I look back into the moderation of past ages, it makes me ashamed to discourse, as if poverty had need of any consolation; for we are now come to that degree of intemperance, that a fair patrimony is too little for a meal. Homer had but one servant, Plato three, and Zeno (the master of the masculine sect of Stoics) had none at all. The daughters of Scipio had their portions out of the common treasury, for their father left them not a penny: how happy were the husbands that had the people of Rome for their father-in-law! Shall any man now contemn poverty after these eminent examples, which are sufficient not only to justify but to recommend it? Upon Diogenes’ only servant running away from him, he was told where he was, and persuaded to fetch him back again: “What,” says he, “can Manes live without Diogenes, and not Diogenes without Manes?” and so let him go. The piety and moderation of Scipio have made his memory more venerable than his arms; and more yet after he left his country than while he defended it: for matters were come to that pass, that either Scipio must be injurious to Rome or Rome to Scipio. Coarse bread and water to a temperate man is as good as a feast; and the very herbs of the field yield a nourishment to man as well as to beasts. It was not by choice meats and perfumes that our forefathers recommended themselves, but in virtuous actions, and the sweat of honest, military, and of manly labors. While Nature lay in common, and all her benefits were promiscuously enjoyed, what could be happier than the state of mankind, when people lived without avarice or envy? What could be richer than when there was not a poor man to be found in the world? So soon as this impartial bounty of Providence came to be restrained by covetousness, and that particulars appropriated to themselves that which was intended for all, then did poverty creep into the world, when some men, by desiring more than came to their share, lost their title to the rest; a loss never to be repaired; for though we may come yet to get much, we once had all. The fruits of the earth were in those days divided among the inhabitants of it, without either want or excess. So long as men contented themselves with their lot, there was no violence, no engrossing or hiding of those benefits for particular advantages, which were appointed for the community; but every man had as much care for his neighbor as for himself. No arms or bloodshed, no war, but with wild beasts: but under the protection of a wood or a cave, they spent their days without cares, and their nights without groans; their innocence was their security and their protection. There were as yet no beds of state, no ornaments, of pearl or embroidery, nor any of those remorses that attend them; but the heavens were their canopy, and the glories of them their spectacle. The motions of the orbs, the courses of the stars, and the wonderful order of Providence, was their contemplation. There was no fear of the house falling, or the rustling of a rat behind the arras; they had no palaces then like cities; but they had open air, and breathing room, crystal fountains, refreshing shades, the meadows dressed up in their native beauty, and such cottages as were according to nature, and wherein they lived contentedly, without fear either of losing or of falling. These people lived without either solitude or fraud; and yet I must call them rather happy than wise. That men were generally better before they were corrupted than after, I make no doubt; and I am apt to believe that they were both stronger and hardier too but their wits were not yet come to maturity; for Nature does not give virtue; and it is a kind of art to become good. They had not as yet torn up the bowels of the earth for gold, silver, or precious stones; and so far were they from killing any man, as we do, for a spectacle, that they were not as yet come to it, either in fear or anger; nay, they spared the very fishes. But, after all this, they were innocent because they were ignorant: and there is a great difference betwixt not knowing how to offend and not being willing to do it. They had, in that rude life, certain images and resemblances of virtue, but yet they fell short of virtue itself, which comes only by institution, learning, and study, as it is perfected by practice. It is indeed the end for which we were born, but yet it did not come into the world with us; and in the best of men, before they are instructed, we find rather the matter and the seeds of virtue than the virtue itself. It is the wonderful benignity of Nature that has laid open to us all things that may do us good, and only hid those things from us that may hurt us; as if she durst not trust us with gold and silver, or with iron, which is the instrument of war and contention, for the other. It is we ourselves that have drawn out of the earth both the causes and the instruments of our dangers: and we are so vain as to set the highest esteem upon those things to which Nature has assigned the lowest place. What can be more coarse and rude in the mine than these precious metals, or more slavish and dirty than the people that dig and work them? and yet they defile our minds more than our bodies, and make the possessor fouler than the artificer of them. Rich men, in fine, are only the greater slaves; both the one and the other want a great deal. Happy is that man that eats only for hunger, and drinks only for thirst; that stands upon his own legs, and lives by reason, not by example; and provides for use and necessity, not for ostentation and pomp! Let us curb our appetites, encourage virtue, and rather be beholden to ourselves for riches than to Fortune, who when a man draws himself into a narrow compass, has the least mark at him. Let my bed be plain and clean, and my clothes so too: my meat without much expense, or many waiters, and neither a burden to my purse nor to my body, not to go out the same way it came in. That which is too little for luxury, is abundantly enough for nature. The end of eating and drinking is satiety; now, what matters it though one eats and drinks more, and another less, so long as the one is not a-hungry, nor the other athirst? Epicurus, who limits pleasure to nature, as the Stoics do virtue, is undoubtedly in the right; and those that cite him to authorize their voluptuousness do exceedingly mistake him, and only seek a good authority for an evil cause: for their pleasures of sloth, gluttony, and lust, have no affinity at all with his precepts or meaning. It is true, that at first sight his philosophy seems effeminate; but he that looks nearer him will find him to be a very brave man only in a womanish dress. It is a common objection, I know, that these philosophers do not live at the rate they talk; fer they can flatter their superiors, gather estates, and be as much concerned at the loss of fortune, or of friends, as other people: as sensible of reproaches, as luxurious in their eating and drinking, their furniture, their houses; as magnificent in their plate, servants, and officers; as profuse and curious in their gardens, etc. Well! and what of all this, or if it were twenty times more? It is some degree of virtue for a man to condemn himself; and if he cannot come up to the best, to be yet better than the worst; and if he cannot wholly subdue his appetites, however to check and diminish them. If I do not live as I preach, take notice that I do not speak of myself, but of virtue, nor am I so much offended with other men’s vices as with my own. All this was objected to Plato, Epicurus, Zeno; nor is any virtue so sacred as to escape malevolence. The Cynic Demetrius was a great instance of severity and mortification; and one that imposed upon himself neither to possess anything, nor so much as to ask it: and yet he had this scorn put upon him, that his profession was poverty, not virtue. Plato is blamed for asking money; Aristotle for receiving it; Democritus for neglecting it; Epicurus for consuming it. How happy were we if we could but come to imitate these men’s vices; for if we knew our own condition, we should find work enough at home. But we are like people that are making merry at a play or a tavern when their own houses are on fire, and yet they know nothing of it. Nay, Cato himself was said to be a drunkard; but drunkenness itself shall sooner be proved to be no crime than Cato dishonest. They that demolish temples, and overturn altars, show their good-will, though they can do the gods no hurt, and so it fares with those that invade the reputation of great men. If the professors of virtue be as the world calls them, avaricious, libidinous, ambitious—what are they then that have a detestation for the very name of it: but malicious natures do not want wit to abuse honester men than themselves. It is the practice of the multitude to bark at eminent men as little dogs do at strangers; for they look upon other men’s virtues as the upbraiding of their own wickedness. We should do well to commend those that are good, if not, let us pass them over; but, however, let us spare ourselves: for beside the blaspheming of virtue, our rage is to no purpose. But to return now to my text. We are ready enough to limit others but loth to put bonds and restraints upon ourselves, though we know that many times a greater evil is cured by a less; and the mind that will not be brought to virtue by precepts, comes to it frequently by necessity. Let us try a little to eat upon a joint stool, to serve ourselves, to live within compass, and accommodate our clothes to the end they were made for. Occasional experiments of our moderation give us the best proof of our firmness and virtue. A well-governed appetite is a great part of liberty, and it is a blessed lot, that since no man can have all things that he would have, we may all of us forbear desiring what we have not. It is the office of temperance to overrule us in our pleasures; some she rejects, others she qualifies and keeps within bounds. Oh! the delights of rest when a man comes to be weary, and of meat when he is heartily hungry. I have learned (says our author) by one journey how many things we have that are superfluous, and how easily they might be spared, for when we are without them upon necessity, we do not so much as feel the want of them. This is the second blessed day (says he) that my friend and I have travelled together: one wagon carries ourselves and our servants; my mattress lies upon the ground and I upon that: our diet answerable to our lodging, and never without our figs and our table-books. The muleteer without shoes, and the mules only prove themselves to be alive by their walking. In this equipage, I am not willing, I perceive, to own myself, but as often as we happen into better company, I presently fall a-blushing, which shows that I am not yet confirmed in those things which I approve and commend. I am not yet come to own my frugality, for he that is ashamed to be seen in a mean condition would be proud of a splendid one. I value myself upon what passengers think of me, and tacitly renounce my principles, whereas I should rather lift up my voice to be heard by mankind, and tell them “You are all mad—your minds are set upon superfluities and you value no man for his virtues.” I came one night weary home, and threw myself upon the bed with this consideration about me: “There is nothing ill that is well taken.” My baker tells me he has no bread; but, says he, I may get some of your tenants, though I fear it is not good. No matter, said I, for I will stay until it be better—that is to say until my stomach will be glad of worse. It is discretion sometimes to practice temperance and wont ourselves to a little, for there are many difficulties both of time and place that may force us upon it. When we come to the matter of patrimony, how strictly do we examine what every man is worth before we will trust him with a penny! “Such a man,” we cry, “has a great estate, but it is shrewdly encumbered—a very fair house, but it was built with borrowed money—a numerous family, but he does not keep touch with his creditors—if his debts were paid he would not be worth a groat.” Why do we not take the same course in other things, and examine what every man is worth? It is not enough to have a long train of attendants, vast possessions, or an incredible treasure in money and jewels—a man may be poor for all this. There is only this difference at best—one man borrows of the usurer, and the other of fortune. What signifies the carving or gilding of the chariot; is the master ever the better of it? We cannot close up this chapter with a more generous instance of moderation than that of Fabricius. Pyrrhus tempted him with a sum of money to betray his country, and Pyrrhus’s physician offered Fabricius, for a sum of money, to poison his master; but he was too brave either to be overcome by gold, or to be overcome by poison, so that he refused the money, and advised Pyrrhus to have a care of treachery: and this too in the heat of a licentious war. Fabricius valued himself upon his poverty, and was as much above the thought of riches as of poison. “Live Pyrrhus,” says he “by my friendship; and turn that to thy satisfaction which was before thy trouble:” that is to say that Fabricius could not be corrupted.  . CONSTANCY OF MIND GIVES A MAN REPUTATION, AND MAKES HIM HAPPY IN DESPITE OF ALL MISFORTUNE. The whole duty of man may be reduced to the two points of abstinence and patience; temperance in prosperity, and courage in adversity. We have already treated of the former: and the other follows now in course. Epicurus will have it, that a wise man will bear all injuries; but the Stoics will not allow those things to be injuries which Epicurus calls so. Now, betwixt these two, there is the same difference that we find betwixt two gladiators; the one receives wounds, but yet maintains his ground, the other tells the people, when he is in blood, that it is but a scratch, and will not suffer anybody to part them. An injury cannot be received, but it must be done; but it may be done and yet not received; as a man may be in the water, and not swim, but if he swims, it is presumed that he is in the water. Or if a blow or a shot be levelled at us, it may so happen that a man may miss his aim, or some accident interpose that may divert the mischief. That which is hurt is passive, and inferior to that which hurts it. But you will say, that Socrates was condemned and put to death, and so received an injury; but I answer, that the tyrants did him an injury, and yet he received none. He that steals anything from me and hides it in my own house, though I have not lost it, yet he has stolen it. He that lies with his own wife, and takes her for another woman, though the woman be honest, the man is an adulterer. Suppose a man gives me a draught of poison and it proves not strong enough to kill me, his guilt is nevertheless for the disappointment. He that makes a pass at me is as much a murderer, though I put it by, as if he had struck me to the heart. It is the intention, not the effect, that makes the wickedness. He is a thief that has the will of killing and slaying, before his hand is dipt in blood; as it is sacrilege, the very intention of laying violent hands upon holy things. If a philosopher be exposed to torments, the ax over his head, his body wounded, his guts in his hands, I will allow him to groan; for virtue itself cannot divest him of the nature of a man; but if his mind stand firm, he has discharged his part. A great mind enables a man to maintain his station with honor; so that he only makes use of what he meets in his way, as a pilgrim that would fain be at his journey’s end. It is the excellency of a great mind to ask nothing, and to want nothing; and to say, “I will have nothing to do with fortune, that repulses Cato, and prefers Vatinius.” He that quits his hold, and accounts anything good that is not honest, runs gaping after casualties, spends his days in anxiety and vain expectation, that man is miserable. And yet it is hard, you will say, to be banished or cast into prison: nay, what if it were to be burnt, or any other way destroyed? We have examples in all ages and cases, of great men that have triumphed over all misfortunes. Metellus suffered exile resolutely, Rutilius cheerfully; Socrates disputed in the dungeon; and though he might have made his escape, refused it; to show the world how easy a thing it was to subdue the two great terrors of mankind, death and a jail. Or what shall we say of Mucius Scevola, a man only of a military courage, and without the help either of philosophy or letters? who, when he found that he had killed the Secretary instead of Porsenna, (the prince,) burnt his right hand to ashes for the mistake; and held his arm in the flame until it was taken away by his very enemies. Porsenna did more easily pardon Mucius for his intent to kill him than Mucius forgave himself for missing of his aim. He might have a luckier thing, but never a braver. Did not Cato, in the last night of his life, take Plato to bed with him, with his sword at his bed’s head; the one that he might have death at his will, the other, that he might have it in his power; being resolved that no man should be able to say, either that he killed or that he saved Cato? So soon as he had composed his thoughts, he took his sword; “Fortune,” says he, “I have hitherto fought for my country’s liberty, and for my own, and only that I might live free among freemen; but the cause is now lost, and Cato safe.” With that word he cast himself upon his sword; and after the physicians that pressed in upon him had bound up his wound, he tore it up again, and expired with the same greatness of soul that he lived. But these are the examples, you will say, of men famous in their generations. Let us but consult history, and we shall find, even in the most effeminate of nations, and the most dissolute of times, men of all degrees, ages, and fortunes, nay, even women themselves, that have overcome the fear of death: which, in truth, is so little to be feared, that duly considered, it is one of the greatest benefits of nature. It was as great an honor for Cato, when his party was broken, that he himself stood his ground, as it would have been if he had carried the day, and settled an universal peace: for, it is an equal prudence, to make the best of a bad game, and to manage a good one. The day that he was repulsed, he played, and the night that he killed himself, he read, as valuing the loss of his life, and the missing of an office at the same rate. People, I know, are apt to pronounce upon other men’s infirmities by the measure of their own, and to think it impossible that a man should be content to be burnt, wounded, killed, or shackled, though in some cases he may. It is only for a great mind to judge of great things; for otherwise, that which is our infirmity will seem to be another body’s, as a straight stick in the water appears to be crooked: he that yields, draws upon his own head his own ruin; for we are sure to get the better of Fortune, if we do but struggle with her. Fencers and wrestlers, we see what blows and bruises they endure, not only for honor, but for exercise. If we turn our backs once, we are routed and pursued; that man only is happy that draws good out of evil, that stands fast in his judgment, and unmoved by any external violence; or however, so little moved, that the keenest arrow in the quiver of Fortune is but as the prick of a needle to him rather than a wound; and all her other weapons fall upon him only as hail upon the roof of a house, that crackles and skips off again, without any damage to the inhabitant. A generous and clear-sighted young man will take it for a happiness to encounter ill fortune. It is nothing for a man to hold up his head in a calm; but to maintain his post when all others have quitted their ground, and there to stand upright where other men are beaten down, this is divine and praiseworthy. What ill is there in torments, or in those things which we commonly account grievous crosses? The great evil is the want of courage, the bowing and submitting to them, which can never happen to a wise man; for he stands upright under any weight; nothing that is to be borne displeases him; he knows his strength, and whatsoever may be any man’s lot, he never complains of, if it be his own. Nature, he says, deceives nobody; she does not tell us whether our children shall be fair or foul, wise or foolish, good subjects or traitors, nor whether our fortune shall be good or bad. We must not judge of a man by his ornaments, but strip him of all the advantages and the impostures of Fortune, nay, of his very body too, and look into his mind. If he can see a naked sword at his eyes without so much as winking; if he make it a thing indifferent to him whether his life go out at his throat or at his mouth; if he can hear himself sentenced to torments or exiles, and under the very hand of the executioner, says thus to himself, “All this I am provided for, and it is no more than a man that is to suffer the fate of humanity.” This is the temper of mind that speaks a man happy; and without this, all the confluences of external comforts signify no more than the personating of a king upon the stage; when the curtain is drawn, we are players again. Not that I pretend to exempt a wise man out of a number of men, as if he had no sense of pain; but I reckon him as compounded of body and soul; the body is irrational, and may be galled, burnt, tortured; but the rational part is fearless, invincible, and not to be shaken. This it is that I reckon upon as the supreme good of man; which until it be perfected, is but an unsteady agitation of thought, and in the perfection an immovable stability. It is not in our contentions with Fortune as in those of the theatre, where we may throw down our arms, and pray for quarter; but here we must die firm and resolute. There needs no encouragement to those things which we are inclined to by a natural instinct, as the preservation of ourselves with ease and pleasure; but if it comes to the trial of our faith by torments, or of our courage by wounds, these are difficulties that we must be armed against by philosophy and precept; and yet all this is no more than what we were born to, and no matter of wonder at all; so that a wise man prepares himself for it, as expecting whatsoever may be will be. My body is frail, and liable not only to the impressions of violence, but to afflictions also, that naturally succeed our pleasures. Full meals bring crudities; whoring and drinking make the hands to shake and the knees to tremble. It is only the surprise and newness of the thing which makes that misfortune terrible, which, by premeditation, might be made easy to us: for that which some people make light by sufferance, others do by foresight. Whatsoever is necessary, we must bear patiently. It is no new thing to die, no new thing to mourn, and no new thing to be merry again. Must I be poor? I shall have company: in banishment? I will think myself born there. If I die, I shall be no more sick; and it is a thing I cannot do but once. Let us never wonder at anything we are born to; for no man has reason to complain, where we are all in the same condition. He that escapes might have suffered; and it is but equal to submit to the law of mortality. We must undergo the colds of winter, the heats of summer; the distempers of the air, and the diseases of the body. A wild beast meets us in one place, and a man that is more brutal in another; we are here assaulted by fire, there by water. Demetrius was reserved by Providence for the age he lived in, to show, that neither the times could corrupt him, nor he reform the people. He was a man of an exact judgment, steady to his purpose, and of a strong eloquence; not finical in his words, but his sense was masculine and vehement. He was so qualified in his life and discourse, that he served both for an example and a reproach. If fortune should have offered that man the government and possession of the whole world, upon condition not to lay it down again, I dare say he would have refused it: and thus have expostulated the matter with you: “Why should you tempt a freeman to put his shoulder under a burden; or an honest man to pollute himself with the dregs of mankind? Why do you offer me the spoils of princes, and of nations, and the price not only of your blood, but of your souls?” It is the part of a great mind to be temperate in prosperity, resolute in adversity; to despise what the vulgar admire, and to prefer a mediocrity to an excess. Was not Socrates oppressed with poverty, labor, nay, the worst of wars in his own family, a fierce and turbulent woman for his wife? were not his children indocile, and like their mother? After seven-and-twenty years spent in arms, he fell under a slavery to the thirty tyrants, and most of them his bitter enemies: he came at last to be sentenced as “a violater of religion, a corrupter of youth, and a common enemy to God and man.” After this he was imprisoned, and put to death by poison, which was all so far from working upon his mind, that it never so much as altered his countenance. We are to bear ill accidents as unkind seasons, distempers, or diseases; and why may we not reckon the actions of wicked men even among those accidents; their deliberations are not counsels but frauds, snares, and inordinate motions of the mind; and they are never without a thousand pretences and occasions of doing a man mischief. They have their informers, their knights of the post; they can make an interest with powerful men, and one may be robbed as well upon the bench as upon the highway. They lie in wait for advantages, and live in perpetual agitation betwixt hope and fear; whereas he that is truly composed will stand all shocks, either of violences, flatteries, or menaces, without perturbation. It is an inward fear that makes us curious after what we hear abroad. It is an error to attribute either good or ill to Fortune; but the matter of it we may; and we ourselves are the occasion of it, being in effect the artificers of our own happiness or misery: for the mind is above fortune; if that be evil, it makes everything else so too; but if it be right and sincere, it corrects what is wrong, and mollifies what is hard, with modesty and courage. There is a great difference among those that the world calls wise men. Some take up private resolutions of opposing Fortune, but they cannot go through with them; for they are either dazzled with splendor on the one hand, or affrighted with terrors on the other; but there are others that will close and grapple with Fortune, and still come off victorious.  Mucius overcame the fire; Regulus, the gibbet; Socrates, poison; Rutilius, banishment; Cato, death; Fabricius, riches; Tubero, poverty; and Sextius, honors. But there are some again so delicate, that they cannot so much as bear a scandalous report; which is the same thing as if a man should quarrel for being jostled in a crowd, or dashed as he walks in the streets. He that has a great way to go must expect a slip, to stumble, and to be tired. To the luxurious man frugality is a punishment; labor and industry to the sluggard; nay, study itself is a torment to him; not that these things are hard to us by nature, but we ourselves are vain and irresolute; nay, we wonder many of us, how any man can live without wine, or endure to rise so early in a morning. A brave man must expect to be tossed; for he is to steer his course in the teeth of Fortune, and to work against wind and weather. In the suffering of torments, though there appears but one virtue, a man exercises many. That which is most eminent is patience, (which is but a branch of fortitude.) But there is prudence also in the choice of the action, and in the bearing what we cannot avoid; and there is constancy in bearing it resolutely: and there is the same concurrence also of several virtues in other generous undertakings. When Leonidas was to carry his  men into the Straits of Thermopylæ, to put a stop to Xerxes’s huge army: “Come, fellow-soldiers,” says he, “eat your dinners here as if you were to sup in another world.” And they answered his resolution. How plain and imperious was that short speech of Cæditius to his men upon a desperate action! and how glorious a mixture was there in it both of bravery and prudence! “Soldiers,” says he, “it is necessary for us to go, but it is not necessary for us to return.” This brief and pertinent harangue was worth ten thousand of the frivolous cavils and distinctions of the schools, which rather break the mind than fortify it; and when it is once perplexed and pricked with difficulties and scruples, there they leave it. Our passions are numerous and strong, and not to be mastered with quirks and tricks, as if a man should undertake to defend the cause of God and man with a bulrush. It was a remarkable piece of honor and policy together, that action of Cæsar’s upon the taking of Pompey’s cabinet at the battle of Pharsalia: it is probable that the letters in it might have discovered who were his friends, and who his enemies; and yet he burnt it without so much as opening it; esteeming it the noblest way of pardoning, to keep himself ignorant both of the offender and of the offense. It was a brave presence of mind also in Alexander, who, upon advice that his physician Philip intended to poison him, took the letter of advice in one hand and the cup in the other; delivering Philip the letter to read while he himself drank the potion. Some are of opinion that death gives a man courage to support pain, and that pain fortifies a man against death: but I say rather, that a wise man depends upon himself against both, and that he does not either suffer with patience, in hopes of death, or die willingly, because he is weary of life; but he bears the one, and waits for the other, and carries a divine mind through all the accidents of human life. He looks upon faith and honesty as the most sacred good of mankind, and neither to be forced by necessity nor corrupted by reward; kill, burn, tear him in pieces, he will be true to his trust; and the more any man labors to make him discover a secret, the deeper will he hide it. Resolution is the inexpugnable defence of human weakness, and it is a wonderful Providence that attends it. Horatius Cocles opposed his single body to the whole army until the bridge was cut down behind him and then leaped into the river with his sword in his hand and came off safe to his party. There was a fellow questioned about a plot upon the life of a tyrant, and put to the torture to declare his confederates: he named, by one and one, all the tyrant’s friends that were about him: and still as they were named, they were put to death: the tyrant asked him at last if there were any more. “Yes,” says he, “yourself were in the plot; and now you have never another friend left in the world:” whereupon the tyrant cut the throats of his own guards. “He is the happy man that is the master of himself, and triumphs over the fear of death, which has overcome the conquerors of the world.”  I. OUR HAPPINESS DEPENDS IN A GREAT MEASURE UPON THE CHOICE OF OUR COMPANY. The comfort of life depends upon conversation. Good offices, and concord, and human society, is like the working of an arch of stone; all would fall to the ground if one piece did not support another. Above all things let us have a tenderness for blood; and it is yet too little not to hurt, unless we profit one another. We are to relieve the distressed; to put the wanderer into his way; and to divide our bread with the hungry: which is but the doing of good to ourselves; for we are only several members of one great body. Nay, we are all of a consanguinity; formed of the same materials, and designed to the same end; this obliges us to a mutual tenderness and converse; and the other, to live with a regard to equity and justice. The love of society is natural; but the choice of our company is matter of virtue and prudence. Noble examples stir us up to noble actions; and the very history of large and public souls, inspires a man with generous thoughts. It makes a man long to be in action, and doing something that the world may be the better for; as protecting the weak, delivering the oppressed, punishing the insolent. It is a great blessing the very conscience of giving a good example; beside, that it is the greatest obligation any man can lay upon the age he lives in. He that converses with the proud shall be puffed up; a lustful acquaintance makes a man lascivious; and the way to secure a man from wickedness is to withdraw from the examples of it. It is too much to have them near us, but more to have them within us—ill examples, pleasure and ease, are, no doubt of it, great corrupters of manners. A rocky ground hardens the horse’s hoof; the mountaineer makes the best soldier; the miner makes the best pioneer, and severity of discipline fortifies the mind. In all excesses and extremities of good and of ill fortune, let us have recourse to great examples that have contemned both. “These are the best instructors that teach in their lives, and prove their words by their actions.” As an ill air may endanger a good constitution, so may a place of ill example endanger a good man, nay, there are some places that have a kind of privilege to be licentious, and where luxury and dissolution of manners seem to be lawful; for great examples give both authority and excuse to wickedness. Those places are to be avoided as dangerous to our manners. Hannibal himself was unmanned by the looseness of Campania, and though a conqueror by his arms, he was overcome by his pleasures. I would as soon live among butchers as among cooks—not but a man may be temperate in any place—but to see drunken men staggering up and down everywhere, and only the spectacle of lust, luxury and excess before our eyes, it is not safe to expose ourselves to the temptation. If the victorious Hannibal himself could not resist it, what shall become of us then that are subdued, and give ground to our lusts already? He that has to do with an enemy in his breast, has a harder task upon him than he that is to encounter one in the field; his hazard is greater if he loses ground, and his duty is perpetual, for he has no place or time for rest. If I give way to pleasure, I must also yield to grief, to poverty, to labor, ambition, anger, until I am torn to pieces by my misfortunes and lusts. But against all this philosophy propounds a liberty, that is to say, a liberty from the service of accidents and fortune. There is not anything that does more mischief to mankind than mercenary masters and philosophy, that do not live as they teach—they give a scandal to virtue. How can any man expect that a ship should steer a fortunate course, when the pilot lies wallowing in his own vomit? It is a usual thing first to learn to do ill ourselves, and then to instruct others to do so: but that man must needs be very wicked that has gathered into himself the wickedness of other people. The best conversation is with the philosophers—that is to say, with such of them as teach us matter, not words—that preach to us things necessary and keep us to the practice of them. There can be no peace in human life without the contempt of all events. There is nothing that either puts better thoughts into a man, or sooner sets him right that is out of the way, than a good companion, for the example has the force of a precept, and touches the heart with an affection to goodness; and not only the frequent hearing and seeing of a wise man delights us, but the very encounter of him suggests profitable contemplation such as a man finds himself moved with when he goes into a holy place. I will take more care with whom I eat and drink than what, for without a friend the table is a manger. Writing does well, but personal discourse and conversation does better; for men give great credit to their ears, and take stronger impressions from example than precept. Cleanthes had never hit Zeno so to the life if he had not been in with him at all his privacies, if he had not watched and observed him whether or not he practised as he taught. Plato got more from Socrates’ manners than from his words, and it was not the school, but the company and familiarity of Epicurus that made Metrodorus, Hermachus and Polyænus so famous. Now, though it be by instinct that we covet society, and avoid solitude, we should yet take this along with us, that the more acquaintance the more danger: nay, there is not one man of a hundred that is to be trusted with himself. If company cannot alter us, it may interrupt us, and he that so much as stops upon the way loses a great deal of a short life, which we yet make shorter by our inconstancy. If an enemy were at our heels, what haste should we make!—but death is so, and yet we never mind it. There is no venturing of tender and easy natures among the people, for it is odds that they will go over to the major party. It would, perhaps, shake the constancy of Socrates, Cato, Lælius, or any of us all, even when our resolutions are at the height, to stand the shock of vice that presses upon us with a kind of public authority. It is a world of mischief that may be done by one single example of avarice or luxury. One voluptuous palate makes a great many. A wealthy neighbor stirs up envy, and a fleering companion moves ill-nature wherever he comes. What will become of those people then that expose themselves to a popular violence? which is ill both ways; either if they comply with the wicked, because they are many, or quarrel with the multitude because they are not principled alike. The best way is to retire, and associate only with those that may be the better for us, and we for them. These respects are mutual; for while we teach, we learn. To deal freely, I dare not trust myself in the hands of much company: I never go abroad that I come home again the same man I went out. Something or other that I had put in order is discomposed; some passion that I had subdued gets head again; and it is just with our minds as it is after a long indisposition with our bodies; we are grown so tender, that the least breath of air exposes us to a relapse. And it is no wonder if a numerous conversation be dangerous, where there is scarce any single man but by his discourse, example, or behavior, does either recommend to us, or imprint in us, or, by a kind of contagion, insensibly infect us with one vice or other; and the more people the greater is the peril. Especially let us have a care of public spectacles where wickedness insinuates itself with pleasure; and, above all others, let us avoid spectacles of cruelty and blood; and have nothing to do with those that are perpetually whining and complaining; there may be faith and kindness there, but no peace. People that are either sad or fearful, we do commonly, for their own sakes, set a guard upon them, for fear they should make an ill use of being alone; especially the imprudent, who are still contriving of mischief, either for others or for themselves, in cherishing their lusts, or forming their designs. So much for the choice of a companion; we shall now proceed to that of a friend.  II. THE BLESSINGS OF FRIENDSHIP. Of all felicities, the most charming is that of a firm and gentle friendship. It sweetens all our cares, dispels our sorrows, and counsels us in all extremities. Nay, if there were no other comfort in it than the bare exercise of so generous a virtue, even for that single reason, a man would not be without it. Beside, that it is a sovereign antidote against all calamities, even against the fear of death itself. But we are not to number our friends by the visits that are made us; and to confound the decencies of ceremony and commerce with the offices of united affections. Caius Gracchus, and after him Livius Drusus, were the men that introduced among the Romans the fashion of separating their visitants; some were taken into their closet, others were only admitted into the antechamber: and some, again, were fain to wait in the hall perhaps, or in the court. So that they had their first, their second, and their third rate friends; but none of them true: only they are called so in course, as we salute strangers with some title or other of respect at a venture. There is no depending upon those men that only take their compliment in their turn, and rather slip through the door than enter at it. He will find himself in a great mistake, that either seeks for a friend in a palace, or tries him at a feast. The great difficulty rests in the choice of him; that is to say, in the first place, let him be virtuous, for vice is contagious, and there is no trusting the sound and the sick together; and he ought to be a wise man too, if a body knew where to find him; but in this case, he that is least ill is best, and the highest degree of human prudence is only the most venial folly. That friendship where men’s affections are cemented by an equal and by a common love of goodness, it is not either hope or fear, or any private interest, that can ever dissolve it: but we carry it with us to our graves, and lay down our lives for it with satisfaction. Paulina’s good and mine (says our author) were so wrapped up together, that in consulting her comfort I provided for my own; and when I could not prevail upon her to take less care for me, she prevailed upon me to take more care for myself. Some people make it a question, whether is the greatest delight, the enjoying of an old friendship, or the acquiring of a new one? but it is in the preparing of a friendship, and in the possession of it, as it is with the husbandman in sowing and reaping; his delight is the hope of his labor in the one case, and the fruit of it in the other. My conversation lies among my books, but yet in the letters of a friend, methinks I have his company; and when I answer them, I do not only write, but speak: and, in effect, a friend is an eye, a heart, a tongue, a hand, at all distances. When friends see one another personally, they do not see one another as they do when they are divided, where the meditation dignifies the prospect; but they are effectually in a great measure absent even when they are present. Consider their nights apart, their private studies, their separate employments, and necessary visits; and they are almost as much together divided as present. True friends are the whole world to one another; and he that is a friend to himself is also a friend to mankind. Even in my very studies, the greatest delight I take in what I learn is the teaching of it to others; for there is no relish, methinks, in the possession of anything without a partner; nay, if wisdom itself were offered me upon condition only of keeping it to myself, I should undoubtedly refuse it. Lucilius tells me, that he was written to by a friend, but cautions me withal not to say anything to him of the affair in question; for he himself stands upon the same guard. What is this but to affirm and to deny the same thing in the same breath, in calling a man a friend, whom we dare not trust as our own soul? For there must be no reserves in friendship: as much deliberation as you please before the league is struck, but no doubtings or jealousies after. It is a preposterous weakness to love a man before we know him, and not to care for him after. It requires time to consider of a friendship, but the resolution once taken, entitles him to my very heart. I look upon my thoughts to be as safe in his breast as in my own: I shall, without any scruple, make him the confidant of my most secret cares and counsels. It goes a great way toward the making of a man faithful, to let him understand that you think him so: and he that does but so much as suspect that I will deceive him gives me a kind of right to cozen him. When I am with my friend, methinks I am alone, and as much at liberty to speak anything as to think it, and as our hearts are one, so must be our interest and convenience; for friendship lays all things in common, and nothing can be good to the one that is ill to the other. I do not speak of such a community as to destroy one another’s propriety; but as the father and the mother have two children, not one apiece, but each of them two. But let us have a care, above all things, that our kindness be rightfully founded; for where there is any other invitation to friendship than the friendship itself, that friendship will be bought and sold. He derogates upon the majesty of it that makes it only dependent upon good fortune. It is a narrow consideration for a man to please himself in the thought of a friend, “because,” says he, “I shall have one to help me when I am sick, in prison, or in want.” A brave man should rather take delight in the contemplation of doing the same offices for another. He that loves a man for his own sake is in an error. A friendship of interest cannot last any longer than the interest itself, and this is the reason that men in prosperity are so much followed, and when a man goes down the wind, nobody comes near him. Temporary friends will never stand the test. One man is forsaken for fear of profit, another is betrayed. It is a negotiation, not a friendship, that has an eye to advantages; only, through the corruption of times, that which was formerly a friendship is now become a design upon a booty: alter your testament, and you lose your friend. But my end of friendship is to have one dearer to me than myself, and for the saving of whose life I would cheerfully lay down my own; taking this along with me, that only wise men can be friends, others are but companions; and that there is a great difference also betwixt love and friendship; the one may sometimes do us hurt, the other always does us good, for the one friend is hopeful to another in all cases, as well in prosperity as in affliction. We receive comfort, even at a distance, from those we love, but then it is light and faint; whereas, presence and conversation touch us to the quick, especially if we find the man we love to be such a person as we wish. It is usual with princes to reproach the living by commending the dead, and to praise those people for speaking truth from whom there is no longer any danger of hearing it. This is Augustus’s case: he was forced to banish his daughter Julia for her common and prostituted impudence; and still upon fresh informations, he was often heard to say, “If Agrippa or Mecenas had been now alive, this would never have been.” But yet where the fault lay may be a question; for perchance it was his own, that had rather complain for the want of them than seek for others as good. The Roman losses by war and by fire, Augustus could quickly supply and repair; but for the loss of two friends he lamented his whole life after. Xerxes, (a vain and a foolish prince) when he made war upon Greece, one told him, “It would never come to a battle”;another, “That he would find only empty cities and countries, for they would not so much as stand the very fame of his coming;” others soothed him in the opinion of his prodigious numbers; and they all concurred to puff him up to his destruction; only Damaratus advised him not to depend too much upon his numbers, for he would rather find them a burden to him than an advantage: and that three hundred men in the straits of the mountains would be sufficient to give a check to his whole army; and that such an accident would undoubtedly turn his vast numbers to his confusion. It fell out afterward as he foretold, and he had thanks for his fidelity. A miserable prince, that among so many thousand subjects had but one servant to tell him the truth!  . HE THAT WOULD BE HAPPY MUST TAKE AN ACCOUNT OF HIS TIME. In the distribution of human life, we find that a great part of it passes away in evil doing; a greater yet in doing just nothing at all: and effectually the whole in doing things beside our business. Some hours we bestow upon ceremony and servile attendances; some upon our pleasures, and the remainder runs at waste. What a deal of time is it that we spend in hopes and fears, love and revenge, in balls, treats, making of interests, suing for offices, soliciting of causes, and slavish flatteries! The shortness of life, I know, is the common complaint both of fools and philosophers; as if the time we have were not sufficient for our duties. But it is with our lives as with our estates, a good husband makes a little go a great way; whereas, let the revenue of a prince fall into the hands of a prodigal, it is gone in a moment. So that the time allotted us, if it were well employed, were abundantly enough to answer all the ends and purposes of mankind. But we squander it away in avarice, drink, sleep, luxury, ambition, fawning addresses, envy, rambling, voyages, impertinent studies, change of counsels, and the like; and when our portion is spent, we find the want of it, though we gave no heed to it in the passage: insomuch, that we have rather made our life short than found it so. You shall have some people perpetually playing with their fingers, whistling, humming, and talking to themselves; and others consume their days in the composing, hearing, or reciting of songs and lampoons. How many precious morning hours do we spend in consultation with barbers, tailors, and tire-women, patching and painting betwixt the comb and the glass! A council must be called upon every hair we cut; and one curl amiss is as much as a body’s life is worth. The truth is, we are more solicitous about our dress than our manners, and about the order of our periwigs than that of the government. At this rate, let us but discount, out of a life of a hundred years, that time which has been spent upon popular negotiations, frivolous amours, domestic brawls, sauntering up and down to no purpose, diseases that we have brought upon ourselves, and this large extent of life will not amount perhaps to the minority of another man. It is a long being, but perchance a short life. And what is the reason of all this? We live as we should never die, and without any thought of human frailty, when yet the very moment we bestow upon this man or thing, may, peradventure, be our last. But the greatest loss of time is delay and expectation, which depend upon the future. We let go the present, which we have in our own power; we look forward to that which depends upon Fortune; and so quit a certainty for an uncertainty. We should do by time as we do by a torrent, make use of it while we have it, for it will not last always. The calamities of human nature may be divided into the fear of death, and the miseries and errors of life. And it is the great work of mankind to master the one, and to rectify the other; and so live as neither to make life irksome to us, nor death terrible. It should be our care, before we are old, to live well, and when we are so, to die well; that we may expect our end without sadness: for it is the duty of life to prepare ourselves for death; and there is not an hour we live that does not mind us of our mortality. Time runs on, and all things have their fate, though it lies in the dark. The period is certain to nature, but what am I the better for it if it be not so to me? We propound travels, arms, adventures, without ever considering that death lies in the way. Our term is set, and none of us know how near it is; but we are all of us agreed that the decree is unchangeable. Why should we wonder to have that befall us to-day which might have happened to us any minute since we were born? Let us therefore live as if every moment were to be our last, and set our accounts right every day that passes over our heads. We are not ready for death, and therefore we fear it, because we do not know what will become of us when we are gone, and that consideration strikes us with an inexplicable terror. The way to avoid this distraction is to contract our business and our thoughts—when the mind is once settled, a day or an age is all one to us; and the series of time, which is now our trouble will be then our delight; for he that is steadily resolved against all uncertainties, shall never be disturbed with the variety of them. Let us make haste, therefore, to live, since every day to a wise man is a new life—for he has done his business the day before, and so prepared himself for the next, that if it be not his last, he knows yet that it might have been so. No man enjoys the true taste of life but he that is willing and ready to quit it. The wit of man is not able to express the blindness of human folly in taking so much more care of our fortunes, our houses, and our money, than we do of our lives—everybody breaks in upon the one gratis, but we betake ourselves to fire and sword if any man invades the other. There is no dividing in the case of patrimony, but people share our time with us at pleasure, so profuse are we of that only thing whereof we may be honestly covetous. It is a common practice to ask an hour or two of a friend for such or such a business, and it is as easily granted, both parties only considering the occasion, and not the thing itself. They never put time to account, which is the most valuable of all precious things; but because they do not see it they reckon upon it as nothing: and yet these easy men when they come to die would give the whole world for those hours again which they so inconsiderately cast away before; but there is no recovering of them. If they could number their days that are yet to come as they can those that are already past, how would those very people tremble at the apprehension of death, though a hundred years hence, that never so much as think of it at present, though they know not but it may take them away the next immediate minute! It is an usual saying “I would give my life for such or such a friend,” when, at the same time, we do give it without so much as thinking of it; nay, when that friend is never the better for it, and we ourselves the worse. Our time is set, and day and night we travel on. There is no baiting by the way, and it is not in the power of either prince or people to prolong it. Such is the love of life, that even those decrepit dotards that have lost the use of it will yet beg the continuance of it, and make themselves younger than they are, as if they could cozen even Fate itself! When they fall sick, what promises of amendment if they escape that bout! What exclamations against the folly of their misspent time—and yet if they recover, they relapse. No man takes care to live well, but long; when yet it is in everybody’s power to do the former, and in no man’s to do the latter. We consume our lives in providing the very instruments of life, and govern ourselves still with a regard to the future, so that we do not properly live, but we are about to live. How great a shame is it to be laying new foundations of life at our last gasp, and for an old man (that can only prove his age by his beard,) with one foot in the grave, to go to school again! While we are young we may learn; our minds are tractable and our bodies fit for labor and study; but when age comes on, we are seized with languor and sloth, afflicted with diseases, and at last we leave the world as ignorant as we came into it—only we die worse than we were born, which is none of Nature’s fault, but ours; for our fears, suspicions, perfidy, etc., are from ourselves. I wish with all my soul that I had thought of my end sooner, but I must make the more haste now and spur on like those that set out late upon a journey—it will be better to learn late than not at all—though it be but only to instruct me how I may leave the stage with honor. In the division of life, there is time present, past, and to come. What we do is short, what we shall do is doubtful, but what we have done is certain, and out of the power of fortune. The passage of time is wonderfully quick, and a man must look backward to see it; and, in that retrospect, he has all past ages at a view; but the present gives us the slip unperceived. It is but a moment that we live, and yet we are dividing it into childhood, youth, man’s estate, and old age, all which degrees we bring into that narrow compass. If we do not watch, we lose our opportunities; if we do not make haste, we are left behind; our best hours escape us, the worst are to come. The purest part of our life runs first, and leaves only the dregs at the bottom; and “that time which is good for nothing else, we dedicate to virtue;” and only propound to begin to live at an age that very few people arrive at. What greater folly can there be in the world than this loss of time, the future being so uncertain, and the damages so irreparable? If death be necessary, why should any man fear it? and if the time of it be uncertain, why should not we always expect it? We should therefore first prepare ourselves by a virtuous life against the dread of an inevitable death; and it is not for us to put off being good until such or such a business is over, for one business draws on another, and we do as good as sow it, one grain produces more. It is not enough to philosophize when we have nothing else to do, but we must attend wisdom even to the neglect of all things else; for we are so far from having time to spare, that the age of the world would be yet too narrow for our business; nor is it sufficient not to omit it, but we must not so much as intermit it. There is nothing that we can properly call our own but our time, and yet every body fools us out of it that has a mind to it. If a man borrows a paltry sum of money, there must be bonds and securities, and every common civility is charged upon account; but he that has my time, thinks he owes me nothing for it, though it be a debt that gratitude itself can never repay. I cannot call any man poor that has enough still left, be it never so little: it is good advice yet to those that have the world before them, to play the good husbands betimes, for it is too late to spare at the bottom, when all is drawn out to the lees. He that takes away a day from me, takes away what he can never restore me. But our time is either forced away from us, or stolen from us, or lost; of which the last is the foulest miscarriage. It is in life as in a journey; a book or a companion brings us to our lodging before we thought we were half-way. Upon the whole matter we consume ourselves one upon another, without any regard at all to our own particular. I do not speak of such as live in notorious scandal, but even those men themselves, whom the world pronounces happy, are smothered in their felicities, servants to their professions and clients, and drowned in their lusts. We are apt to complain of the haughtiness of great men, when yet there is hardly any of them all so proud but that, at some time or other, a man may yet have access to him, and perhaps a good word or look into the bargain. Why do we not rather complain of ourselves, for being of all others, even to ourselves, the most deaf and inaccessible. Company and business are great devourers of time, and our vices destroy our lives as well as our fortunes. The present is but a moment, and perpetually in flux; the time past, we call to mind when we please, and it will abide the examination and inspection. But the busy man has not leisure to look back, or if he has, it is an unpleasant thing to reflect upon a life to be repented of, whereas the conscience of a good life puts a man into a secure and perpetual possession of a felicity never to be disturbed or taken away: but he that has led a wicked life is afraid of his own memory; and, in the review of himself, he finds only appetite, avarice, or ambition, instead of virtue. But still he that is not at leisure many times to live, must, when his fate comes, whether he will or not, be at leisure to die. Alas! what is time to eternity? the age of a man to the age of the world? And how much of this little do we spend in fears, anxieties, tears, childhood! nay, we sleep away the one half. How great a part of it runs away in luxury and excess: the ranging of our guests, our servants, and our dishes! As if we were to eat and drink not for satiety, but ambition. The nights may well seem short that are so dear bought, and bestowed upon wine and women; the day is lost in expectation of the night, and the night in the apprehension of the morning. There is a terror in our very pleasures; and this vexatious thought in the very height of them, that they will not last always: which is a canker in the delights, even of the greatest and the most fortunate of men.   HAPPY IS THE MAN THAT MAY CHOOSE HIS OWN BUSINESS. Oh the blessings of privacy and leisure! The wish of the powerful and eminent, but the privilege only of inferiors; who are the only people that live to themselves: nay, the very thought and hope of it is a consolation, even in the middle of all the tumults and hazards that attend greatness. It was Augustus’ prayer, that he might live to retire and deliver himself from public business: his discourses were still pointing that way, and the highest felicity which this mighty prince had in prospect, was the divesting himself of that illustrious state, which, how glorious soever in show, had at the bottom of it only anxiety and care. But it is one thing to retire for pleasure, and another thing for virtue, which must be active even in that retreat, and give proof of what it has learned: for a good and a wise man does in privacy consult the well-being of posterity. Zeno and Chrysippus did greater things in their studies than if they had led armies, borne offices, or given laws; which in truth they did, not to one city alone, but to all mankind: their quiet contributed more to the common benefit than the sweat and labor of other people. That retreat is not worth the while which does not afford a man greater and nobler work than business. There is no slavish attendance upon great officers, no canvassing for places, no making of parties, no disappointments in my pretension to this charge, to that regiment, or to such or such a title, no envy of any man’s favor or fortune; but a calm enjoyment of the general bounties of Providence in company with a good conscience. A wise man is never so busy as in the solitary contemplation of God and the works of Nature. He withdraws himself to attend the service of future ages: and those counsels which he finds salutary to himself, he commits to writing for the good of after-times, as we do the receipts of sovereign antidotes or balsams. He that is well employed in his study, though he may seem to do nothing at all, does the greatest things yet of all others, in affairs both human and divine. To supply a friend with a sum of money, or give my voice for an office, these are only private and particular obligations: but he that lays down precepts for the governing of our lives and the moderating of our passions, obliges human nature not only in the present, but in all succeeding generations. He that would be at quiet, let him repair to his philosophy, a study that has credit with all sorts of men. The eloquence of the bar, or whatsoever else addresses to the people, is never without enemies; but philosophy minds its own business, and even the worst have an esteem for it. There can never be such a conspiracy against virtue, the world can never be so wicked, but the very name of a philosopher shall still continue venerable and sacred. And yet philosophy itself must be handled modestly and with caution. But what shall we say of Cato then, for his meddling in the broil of a civil war, and interposing himself in the quarrel betwixt two enraged princes? He that, when Rome was split into two factions betwixt Pompey and Cæsar, declared himself against both. I speak this of Cato’s last part; for in his former time the commonwealth was made unfit for a wise man’s administration. All he could do then was but bawling and beating of the air: one while he was lugged and tumbled by the rabble, spit upon and dragged out of the forum, and then again hurried out of the senate-house to prison. There are some things which we propound originally, and others which fall in as accessory to another proposition. If a wise man retire, it is no matter whether he does it because the commonwealth was wanting to him, or because he was wanting to it. But to what republic shall a man betake himself? Not to Athens, where Socrates was condemned, and whence Aristotle fled, for fear he should have been condemned too, and where virtue was oppressed by envy: not to Carthage, where there was nothing but tyranny, injustice, cruelty, and ingratitude. There is scarce any government to be found that will either endure a wise man, or which a wise man will endure; so that privacy is made necessary, because the only thing which is better is nowhere to be had. A man may commend navigation, and yet caution us against those seas that are troublesome and dangerous: so that he does as good as command me not to weigh anchor that commends sailing only upon these terms. He that is a slave to business is the most wretched of slaves. “But how shall I get myself at liberty? We can run any hazards for money: take any pains for honor; and why do we not venture also something for leisure and freedom? without which we must expect to live and die in a tumult: for so long as we live in public, business breaks in upon us, as one billow drives on another; and there is no avoiding it with either modesty or quiet.” It is a kind of whirlpool, that sucks a man in, and he can never disengage himself. A man of business cannot in truth be said to live, and not one of a thousand understands how to do it: for how to live, and how to die, is the lesson of every moment of our lives: all other arts have their masters. As a busy life is always a miserable life, so it is the greatest of all miseries to be perpetually employed upon other people’s business; for to sleep, to eat, to drink, at their hour; to walk their pace, and to love and hate as they do, is the vilest of servitudes. Now, though business must be quitted, let it not be done unseasonably; the longer we defer it, the more we endanger our liberty; and yet we must no more fly before the time than linger when the time comes: or, however, we must not love business for business’ sake, nor indeed do we, but for the profit that goes along with it: for we love the reward of misery, though we hate the misery itself. Many people, I know, seek business without choosing it, and they are even weary of their lives without it for want of entertainment in their own thoughts; the hours are long and hateful to them when they are alone, and they seem as short on the other side in their debauches. When they are no longer candidates, they are suffragans; when they give over other people’s business, they do their own; and pretend business, but they make it, and value themselves upon being thought men of employment.  Liberty is the thing which they are perpetually a-wishing, and never come to obtain: a thing never to be bought nor sold, but a man must ask it of himself, and give it to himself. He that has given proof of his virtue in public, should do well to make a trial of it in private also. It is not that solitude, or a country life, teaches innocence or frugality; but vice falls of itself, without witnesses and spectators, for the thing it designs is to be taken notice of. Did ever any man put on rich clothes not to be seen? or spread the pomp of his luxury where nobody was to take notice of it? If it were not for admirers and spectators there would be no temptations to excess: the very keeping of us from exposing them cures us of desiring them, for vanity and intemperance are fed with ostentation. He that has lived at sea in a storm, let him retire and die in the haven; but let his retreat be without ostentation, and wherein he may enjoy himself with a good conscience, without the want, the fear, the hatred, or the desire, of anything, not out of malevolent detestation of mankind, but for satisfaction and repose. He that shuns both business and men, either out of envy, or any other discontent, his retreat is but to the life of a mole: nor does he live to himself, as a wise man does, but to his bed, his belly, and his lusts. Many people seem to retire out of a weariness of public affairs, and the trouble of disappointments; and yet ambition finds them out even in that recess into which fear and weariness had cast them; and so does luxury, pride, and most of the distempers of a public life. There are many that lie close, not that they may live securely, but that they may transgress more privately: it is their conscience, not their states, that makes them keep a porter; for they live at such a rate, that to be seen before they be aware is to be detected. Crates saw a young man walking by himself; “Have a care,” says he “of lewd company.” Some men are busy in idleness, and make peace more laborious and troublesome than war; nay, and more wicked too, when they bestow it upon such lusts, and other vices, which even the license of a military life would not endure. We cannot call these people men of leisure that are wholly taken up with their pleasures. A troublesome life is much to be preferred before a slothful one; and it is a strange thing, methinks, that any man should fear death that has buried himself alive; as privacy without letters is but the burying of a man quick. There are some that make a boast of their retreat, which is but a kind of lazy ambition; they retire to make people talk of them, whereas I would rather withdraw to speak to myself. And what shall that be, but that which we are apt to speak of one another? I will speak ill of myself: I will examine, accuse, and punish my infirmities. I have no design to be cried up for a great man, that has renounced the world in a contempt of the vanity and madness of human life; I blame nobody but myself, and I address only to myself. He that comes to me for help is mistaken, for I am not a physician, but a patient: and I shall be well enough content to have it said, when any man leaves me, “I took him for a happy and a learned man, and truly I find no such matter.” I had rather have my retreat pardoned than envied. There are some creatures that confound their footing about their dens, that they may not be found out, and so should a wise man in the case of his retirement. When the door is open, the thief passes it by as not worth his while; but when it is bolted and sealed, it is a temptation for people to be prying. To have it said “that such a one is never out of his study, and sees nobody,” etc.; this furnishes matter for discourse. He that makes his retirement too strict and severe, does as good as call company to take notice of it. Every man knows his own constitution; one eases his stomach by vomit—another supports it with good nourishment; he that has the gout forbears wine and bathing, and every man applies to the part that is most infirm. He that shows a gouty foot, a lame hand, or contracted nerves, shall be permitted to lie still and attend his cure; and why not so in the vices of his mind! We must discharge all impediments and make way for philosophy, as a study inconsistent with common business. To all other things we must deny ourselves openly and frankly, when we are sick refuse visits, keep ourselves close, and lay aside all public cares, and shall we not do as much when we philosophize? Business is the drudgery of the world, and only fit for slaves, but contemplation is the work of wise men. Not but that solitude and company may be allowed to take their turns: the one creates in us the love of mankind, the other that of ourselves; solitude relieves us when we are sick of company, and conversation when we are weary of being alone; so that the one cures the other. “There is no man,” in fine, “so miserable as he that is at a loss how to spend his time.” He is restless in his thoughts, unsteady in his counsels, dissatisfied with the present, solicitous for the future; whereas he that prudently computes his hours and his business, does not only fortify himself against the common accidents of life, but improves the most rigorous dispensations of Providence to his comfort, and stands firm under all the trials of human weakness.  . THE CONTEMPT OF DEATH MAKES ALL THE MISERIES OF LIFE EASY TO US. It is a hard task to master the natural desire of life by a philosophical contempt of death, and to convince the world that there is no hurt in it, and crush an opinion that was brought up with us from our cradles. What help? what encouragement? what shall we say to human frailty, to carry it fearless through the fury of flames, and upon the points of swords? what rhetoric shall we use to bear down the universal consent of people to so dangerous an error? The captious and superfine subtleties of the schools will never do the work: these speak many things sharp, but utterly unnecessary, and void of effect. The truth of it is, there is but one chain that holds all the world in bondage, and that is the love of life. It is not that I propound the making of death so indifferent to us, as it is, whether a man’s hairs be even or odd; for what with self-love, and an implanted desire in every being of preserving itself, and a long acquaintance betwixt the soul and body, friends may be loth to part, and death may carry an appearance of evil, though in truth it is itself no evil at all. Beside, that we are to go to a strange place in the dark, and under great uncertainties of our future state; so that people die in terror, because they do not know whither they are to go, and they are apt to fancy the worst of what they do not understand: these thoughts are indeed sufficient to startle a man of great resolution without a wonderful support from above. And, moreover, our natural scruples and infirmities are assisted by the wits and fancies of all ages, in their infamous and horrid description of another world: nay, taking it for granted that there will be no reward and punishment, they are yet more afraid of an annihilation than of hell itself. But what is it we fear? “Oh! it is a terrible thing to die.” Well; and is it not better once to suffer it, than always to fear it? The earth itself suffers both with me, and before me. How many islands are swallowed up in the sea! how many towns do we sail over! nay, how many nations are wholly lost, either by inundations or earthquakes! and shall I be afraid of my little body? why should I, that am sure to die, and that all other things are mortal, be fearful of coming to my last gasp myself? It is the fear of death that makes us base, and troubles and destroys the life we would preserve; that aggravates all circumstances, and makes them formidable. We depend but upon a flying moment. Die we must; but when? what is that to us? It is the law of Nature, the tribute of mortals, and the remedy of all evils. It is only the disguise that affrights us; as children that are terrified with a vizor. Take away the instruments of death, the fire, the ax, the guards, the executioners, the whips, and the racks; take away the pomp, I say, and the circumstances that accompany it, and death is no more than what my slave yesterday contemned; the pain is nothing to a fit of the stone; if it be tolerable, it is not great; and if intolerable, it cannot last long. There is nothing that Nature has made necessary which is more easy than death: we are longer a-coming into the world than going out of it; and there is not any minute of our lives wherein we may not reasonably expect it. Nay, it is but a moment’s work, the parting of the soul and body. What a shame is it then to stand in fear of anything so long that is over so soon! Nor is it any great matter to overcome this fear; for we have examples as well of the meanest of men as of the greatest that have done it. There was a fellow to be exposed upon the theatre, who in disdain thrust a stick down his own throat, and choked himself; and another on the same occasion, pretended to nod upon the chariot, as if he were asleep, cast his head betwixt the spokes of the wheel, and kept his seat until his neck was broken. Caligula, upon a dispute with Canius Julius; “Do not flatter yourself,” says he, “for I have given orders to put you to death.” “I thank your most gracious Majesty for it,” says Canius, giving to understand, perhaps, that under his government death was a mercy: for he knew that Caligula seldom failed of being as good as his word in that case. He was at play when the officer carried him away to his execution, and beckoning to the centurion, “Pray,” says he, “will you bear me witness, when I am dead and gone, that I had the better of the game?” He was a man exceedingly beloved and lamented, and, for a farewell, after he had preached moderation to his friends; “You,” says he, “are here disputing about the immortality of the soul, and I am now going to learn the truth of it. If I discover any thing upon that point, you shall hear of it.” Nay, the most timorous of creatures, when they see there is no escaping, they oppose themselves to all dangers; the despair gives them courage, and the necessity overcomes the fear. Socrates was thirty days in prison after his sentence, and had time enough to have starved himself, and so to have prevented the poison: but he gave the world the blessing of his life as long as he could, and took that fatal draught in the meditation and contempt of death. Marcellinus, in a deliberation upon death, called several of his friends about him: one was fearful, and advised what he himself would have done in the case; another gave the counsel which he thought Marcellinus would like best; but a friend of his that was a Stoic, and a stout man, reasoned the matter to him after this manner; Marcellinus do not trouble yourself, as if it were such a mighty business that you have now in hand; it is nothing to live; all your servants do it, nay, your very beasts too; but to die honestly and resolutely, that is a great point. Consider with yourself there is nothing pleasant in life but what you have tasted already, and that which is to come is but the same over again; and how many men are there in the world that rather choose to die than to suffer the nauseous tediousness of the repetition? Upon which discourse he fasted himself to death. It was the custom of Pacuvius to solemnize, in a kind of pageantry, every day his own funeral. When he had swilled and gormandized to a luxurious and beastly excess, he was carried away from supper to bed with this song and acclamation, “He has lived, he has lived.” That which he did in lewdness, will become us to do in sobriety and prudence. If it shall please God to add another day to our lives, let us thankfully receive it; but, however, it is our happiest and securest course so to compose ourselves to-night, that we may have no anxious dependence on to-morrow. “He that can say, I have lived this day, makes the next clear again.” Death is the worst that either the severity of laws or the cruelty of tyrants can impose upon us; and it is the utmost extent of the dominion of Fortune. He that is fortified against that, must, consequently, be superior to all other difficulties that are put in the way to it. Nay, and on some occasions, it requires more courage to live than to die. He that is not prepared for death shall be perpetually troubled, as well with vain apprehensions, as with real dangers. It is not death itself that is dreadful, but the fear of it that goes before it. When the mind is under a consternation, there is no state of life that can please us; for we do not so endeavor to avoid mischiefs as to run away from them, and the greatest slaughter is upon a flying enemy. Had not a man better breathe out his last once for all, than lie agonizing in pains, consuming by inches, losing of his blood by drops? and yet how many are there that are ready to betray their country, and their friends, and to prostitute their very wives and daughters, to preserve a miserable carcass! Madmen and children have no apprehension of death; and it were a shame that our reason should not do as much toward our security as their folly. But the great matter is to die considerately and cheerfully upon the foundation of virtue; for life in itself is irksome, and only eating and drinking in a circle. How many are there that, betwixt the apprehensions of death and the miseries of life, are at their wits’ end what to do with themselves? Wherefore let us fortify ourselves against those calamities from which the prince is no more exempt than the beggar. Pompey the Great had his head taken off by a boy and a eunuch, (young Ptolemy and Photinus.) Caligula commanded the tribune Dæcimus to kill Lepidus; and another tribune (Chæreus) did as much for Caligula. Never was a man so great but he was as liable to suffer mischief as he was able to do it. Has not a thief, or an enemy, your throat at his mercy? nay, and the meanest of servants has the power of life and death over his master; for whosoever contemns his own life may be master of another body’s. You will find in story, that the displeasure of servants has been as fatal as that of tyrants: and what matters it the power of him we fear, when the thing we fear is in every body’s power? Suppose I fall into the hands of an enemy, and the conqueror condemns me to be led in triumph; it is but carrying me thither whither I should have gone without him, that is to say, toward death, whither I have been marching ever since I was born. It is the fear of our last hour that disquiets all the rest. By the justice of all constitutions, mankind is condemned to a capital punishment; now, how despicable would that man appear, who, being sentenced to death in common with the whole world, should only petition that he might be the last man brought to the block? Some men are particularly afraid of thunder, and yet extremely careless of other and of greater dangers: as if that were all they have to fear. Will not a sword, a stone, a fever, do the work as well? Suppose the bolt should hit us, it were yet braver to die with a stroke than with the bare apprehension of it: beside the vanity of imagining that heaven and earth should be put into such a disorder only for the death of one man. A good and a brave man is not moved with lightning, tempest, or earthquakes; but perhaps he would voluntarily plunge himself into that gulf, where otherwise he should only fall. The cutting of a corn, or the swallowing of a fly, is enough to dispatch a man; and it is no matter how great that is that brings me to my death, so long as death itself is but little. Life is a small matter; but it is a matter of importance to contemn it. Nature, that begat us, expels us, and a better and a safer place is provided for us. And what is death but a ceasing to be what we were before? We are kindled and put out: to cease to be, and not to begin to be, is the same thing. We die daily, and while we are growing, our life decreases; every moment that passes takes away part of it; all that is past is lost; nay, we divide with death the very instant that we live. As the last sand in the glass does not measure the hour, but finishes it; so the last moment that we live does not make up death, but concludes. There are some that pray more earnestly for death than we do for life; but it is better to receive it cheerfully when it comes than to hasten it before the time. “But what is it that we would live any longer for?” Not for our pleasures; for those we have tasted over and over, even to satiety: so that there is no point of luxury that is new to us. “But a man would be loth to leave his country and his friends behind him;” that is to say, he would have them go first; for that is the least part of his care. “Well; but I would fain live to do more good, and discharge myself in the offices of life;” as if to die were not the duty of every man that lives. We are loth to leave our possessions; and no man swims well with his luggage. We are all of us equally fearful of death, and ignorant of life; but what can be more shameful than to be solicitous upon the brink of security? If death be at any time to be feared, it is always to be feared; but the way never to fear it, is to be often thinking of it. To what end is it to put off for a little while that which we cannot avoid? He that dies does but follow him that is dead. “Why are we then so long afraid of that which is so little awhile of doing?” How miserable are those people that spend their lives in the dismal apprehensions of death! for they are beset on all hands, and every minute in dread of a surprise. We must therefore look about us, as if we were in an enemy’s country; and consider our last hour, not as a punishment, but as the law of Nature: the fear of it is a continual palpitation of the heart, and he that overcomes that terror shall never be troubled with any other. Life is a navigation; we are perpetually wallowing and dashing one against another; sometimes we suffer shipwreck, but we are always in danger and in expectation of it. And what is it when it comes, but either the end of a journey, or a passage? It is as great a folly to fear death as to fear old age; nay, as to fear life itself; for he that would not die ought not to live, since death is the condition of life. Beside that it is a madness to fear a thing that is certain; for where there is no doubt, there is no place for fear. We are still chiding of Fate, and even those that exact the most rigorous justice betwixt man and man are yet themselves unjust to Providence. “Why was such a one taken away in the prime of his years?” As if it were the number of years that makes death easy to us, and not the temper of the mind. He that would live a little longer to-day, would be as loth to die a hundred years hence. But which is more reasonable for us to obey Nature, or for Nature to obey us? Go we must at last, and no matter how soon. It is the work of Fate to make us live long, but it is the business of virtue to make a short life sufficient. Life is to be measured by action, not by time; a man may die old at thirty, and young at fourscore: nay, the one lives after death, and the other perished before he died. I look upon age among the effects of chance. How long I shall live is in the power of others, but it is in my own how well. The largest space of time is to live till a man is wise. He that dies of old age does no more than go to bed when he is weary. Death is the test of life, and it is that only which discovers what we are, and distinguishes betwixt ostentation and virtue. A man may dispute, cite great authorities, talk learnedly, huff it out, and yet be rotten at heart. But let us soberly attend our business: and since it is uncertain when, or where, we shall die, let us look for death in all places, and at all times: we can never study that point too much, which we can never come to experiment whether we know it or not. It is a blessed thing to dispatch the business of life before we die, and then to expect death in the possession of a happy life. He is the great man who is willing to die when his life is pleasant to him. An honest life is not a greater good than an honest death. How many brave young men, by an instinct of Nature, are carried on to great actions, and even to the contempt of all hazards!  It is childish to go out of the world groaning and wailing as we came into it. Our bodies must be thrown away, as the secundine that wraps up the infant, the other being only the covering of the soul; we shall then discover the secrets of Nature; the darkness shall be discussed, and our souls irradiated with light and glory: a glory without a shadow; a glory that shall surround us, and from whence we shall look down and see day and night beneath us. If we cannot lift up our eyes toward the lamp of heaven without dazzling, what shall we do when we come to behold the divine light in its illustrious original? That death which we so much dread and decline, is not the determination, but the intermission of a life, which will return again. All those things, that are the very cause of life, are the way to death: we fear it as we do fame; but it is a great folly to fear words. Some people are so impatient of life, that they are still wishing for death; but he that wishes to die does not desire it: let us rather wait God’s pleasure, and pray for health and life. If we have a mind to live, why do we wish to die? If we have a mind to die, we may do it without talking of it. Men are a great deal more resolute in the article of death itself than they are about the circumstances of it: for it gives a man courage to consider that his fate is inevitable: the slow approaches of death are the most troublesome to us; as we see many a gladiator, who upon his wounds, will direct his adversary’s weapon to his very heart, though but timorous perhaps in the combat. There are some that have not the heart either to live or die; that is a sad case. But this we are sure of, “the fear of death is a continual slavery, as the contempt of it is certain liberty.”  I. CONSOLATIONS AGAINST DEATH, FROM THE PROVIDENCE AND THE NECESSITY OF IT. This life is only a prelude to eternity, where we are to expect another original, and another state of things; we have no prospect of heaven here but at a distance; let us therefore expect our last and decretory hour with courage. The last (I say) to our bodies, but not to our minds: our luggage we leave behind us, and return as naked out of the world as we came into it. The day which we fear as our last is but the birth-day of our eternity; and it is the only way to it. So that what we fear as a rock, proves to be but a port, in many cases to be desired, never to be refused; and he that dies young has only made a quick voyage of it. Some are becalmed, others cut it away before wind; and we live just as we sail: first, we rub our childhood out of sight; our youth next; and then our middle age: after that follows old age, and brings us to the common end of mankind. It is a great providence that we have more ways out of the world than we have into it. Our security stands upon a point, the very article of death. It draws a great many blessings into a very narrow compass: and although the fruit of it does not seem to extend to the defunct, yet the difficulty of it is more than balanced by the contemplation of the future. Nay, suppose that all the business of this world should be forgotten, or my memory, traduced, what is all this to me? “I have done my duty.” Undoubtedly that which puts an end to all other evils, cannot be a very great evil itself, and yet it is no easy thing for flesh and blood to despise life. What if death comes? If it does not stay with us why should we fear it? One hangs himself for a mistress; another leaps the garret-window to avoid a choleric master; a third runs away and stabs himself, rather than he will be brought back again. We see the force even of our infirmities, and shall we not then do greater things for the love of virtue? To suffer death is but the law of nature; and it is a great comfort that it can be done but once; in the very convulsions of it we have this consolation, that our pain is near an end, and that it frees us from all the miseries of life. What it is we know not, and it were rash to condemn what we do not understand; but this we presume, either that we shall pass out of this into a better life, where we shall live with tranquillity and splendor, in diviner mansions, or else return to our first principles, free from the sense of any inconvenience. There is nothing immortal, nor many things lasting; by but divers ways everything comes to an end. What an arrogance is it then, when the world itself stands condemned to a dissolution, that man alone should expect to live forever! It is unjust not to allow unto the giver the power of disposing of his own bounty, and a folly only to value the present. Death is as much a debt as money, and life is but a journey towards it: some dispatch it sooner, others later, but we must all have the same period. The thunderbolt is undoubtedly just that draws even from those that are struck with it a veneration. A great soul takes no delight in staying with the body: it considers whence it came, and knows whither it is to go. The day will come that shall separate this mixture of soul and body, of divine and human; my body I will leave where I found it, my soul I will restore to heaven, which would have been there already, but for the clog that keeps it down: and beside, how many men have been the worse for longer living, that might have died with reputation if they had been sooner taken away! How many disappointments of hopeful youths, that have proved dissolute men! Over and above the ruins, shipwrecks, torments, prisons, that attend long life; a blessing so deceitful, that if a child were in condition to judge of it, and at liberty to refuse it, he would not take it. What Providence has made necessary, human prudence should comply with cheerfully: as there is a necessity of death, so that necessity is equal and invincible. No man has cause of complaint for that which every man must suffer as well as himself. When we should die, we will not, and when we would not we must: but our fate is fixed, and unavoidable is the decree. Why do we then stand trembling when the time comes? Why do we not as well lament that we did not live a thousand years ago, as that we shall not be alive a thousand years hence? It is but traveling the great road, and to the place whither we must all go at last. It is but submitting to the law of Nature, and to that lot which the whole world has suffered that is gone before us; and so must they too that are to come after us. Nay, how many thousands, when our time comes, will expire in the same moment with us! He that will not follow shall be drawn by force: and is it not much better now to do that willingly which we shall otherwise be made to do in spite of our hearts? The sons of mortal parents must expect a mortal posterity—death is the end of great and small. We are born helpless, and exposed to the injuries of all creatures and of all weathers. The very necessaries of life are deadly to us; we meet with our fate in our dishes, in our cups, and in the very air we breathe; nay, our very birth is inauspicious, for we come into the world weeping, and in the middle of our designs, while we are meditating great matters, and stretching of our thoughts to after ages, death cuts us off, and our longest date is only the revolution of a few years. One man dies at the table; another goes away in his sleep, a third in his mistress’s arms, a fourth is stabbed, another is stung with an adder, or crushed with the fall of a house. We have several ways to our end, but the end itself, which is death, is still the same. Whether we die by a sword, by a halter, by a potion, or by a disease, it is all but death. A child dies in the swaddling-clouts, and an old man at a hundred—they are both mortal alike, though the one goes sooner than the other. All that lies betwixt the cradle and the grave is uncertain. If we compute the troubles, the life even of a child is long: if the sweetness of the passage, that of an old man is short; the whole is slippery and deceitful, and only death certain; and yet all people complain of that which never deceived any man. Senecio raised himself from a small beginning to a vast fortune, being very well skilled in the faculties both of getting and of keeping, and either of them was sufficient for the doing of his business. He was a man infinitely careful both of his patrimony and of his body. He gave me a morning’s visit, (says our author,) and after that visit he went away and spent the rest of the day with a friend of his that was desperately sick. At night, he was merry at supper, and seized immediately after with a quinsy which dispatched him in a few hours. This man that had money at use in all places, and in the very course and height of his prosperity was thus cut off. How foolish a thing is it then for a man to flatter himself with long hopes, and to pretend to dispose of the future: nay, the very present slips through our fingers, and there is not that moment which we can call our own. How vain a thing is it for us to enter upon projects, and to say to ourselves, “Well, I will go build, purchase, discharge such offices, settle my affairs, and then retire!” We are all of us born to the same casualties—all equally frail and uncertain of to-morrow. At the very altar where we pray for life, we learn to die, by seeing the sacrifices killed before us. But there is no need of a wound, or searching the heart for it, when the noose of a cord, or the smothering of a pillow will do the work. All things have their seasons—they begin, they increase, and they die. The heavens and the earth grow old, and are appointed their periods. That which we call death is but a pause or suspension; and, in truth, a progress to life, only our thoughts look downward upon the body, and not forward upon things to come. All things under the sun are mortal—cities—empires—and the time will come when it shall be a question where they were, and, perchance, whether ever they had a being or not. Some will be destroyed by war, others by luxury, fire, inundations, earthquakes—why should it trouble me then to die, as a forerunner of an universal dissolution? A great mind submits itself to God, and suffers willingly what the law of the universe will otherwise bring to pass upon necessity. That good old man Bassus, (though with one foot in the grave,) how cheerful a mind does he bear. He lives in the view of death, and contemplates his own end with less concern of thought or countenance, than he would do another man’s. It is a hard lesson, and we are a long time a learning of it, to receive our death without trouble, especially in the case of Bassus: in other deaths there is a mixture of hope—a disease may be cured, a fire quenched, a falling house either propped or avoided, the sea may swallow a man and throw him up again, a pardon may interpose twixt the ax and the body—but in the case of old age there is no place for either hope or intercession. Let us live in our bodies, therefore, as if we were only to lodge in them this night, and to leave them to-morrow. It is the frequent thought of death that must fortify us against the necessity of it. He that has armed himself against poverty, may, perhaps, come to live in plenty. A man may strengthen himself against pain and yet live in a state of health; against the loss of friends, and never lose any, but he that fortifies himself against the fear of death shall most certainly have occasion to employ that virtue. It is the care of a wise and a good man to look to his manners and actions; and rather how well he lives than how long, for to die sooner or later is not the business, but to die well or ill, for “death brings us to immortality.”  II. AGAINST IMMODERATE SORROW FOR THE DEATH OF FRIENDS. Next to the encounter of death in our own bodies, the most sensible calamity to an honest man is the death of a friend; and we are not in truth without some generous instances of those that have preferred a friend’s life before their own; and yet this affliction, which by nature is so grievous to us, is by virtue and Providence made familiar and easy. To lament the death of a friend is both natural and just; a sigh or a tear I would allow to his memory: but no profuse or obstinate sorrow. Clamorous and public lamentations are not so much the effects of grief as of vain-glory. He that is sadder in company than alone, shows rather the ambition of his sorrow than the piety of it. Nay, and in the violence of his passion there fall out twenty things that set him a-laughing. At the long-run, time cures all, but it were better done by moderation and wisdom. Some people do as good as set a watch upon themselves, as if they were afraid that their grief would make an escape. The ostentation of grief is many times more than the grief itself. When any body is within hearing, what groans and outcries! when they are alone and private, all is hush and quiet: so soon as any body comes in, they are at it again; and down they throw themselves upon the bed; fall to wringing of their hands, and wishing of themselves dead; which they might have executed by themselves; but their sorrow goes off with the company. We forsake nature, and run over to the practices of the people, that never were the authors of anything that is good. If destiny were to be wrought upon by tears, I would allow you to spend your days and nights in sadness and mourning, tearing of your hair, and beating of your breast; but if Fate be inexorable, and death will keep what it has taken, grief is to no purpose. And yet I would not advise insensibility and hardness; it were inhumanity, and not virtue, not to be moved at the separation of familiar friends and relations: now, in such cases, we cannot command ourselves, we cannot forbear weeping, and we ought not to forbear: but let us not pass the bounds of affection, and run into imitation; within these limits it is some ease to the mind. A wise man gives way to tears in some cases, and cannot avoid them in others. When one is struck with the surprise of ill-news, as the death of a friend, or the like; or upon the last embrace of an acquaintance under the hand of an executioner, he lies under a natural necessity of weeping and trembling. In another case, we may indulge our sorrow, as upon the memory of a dead friend’s conversation or kindness, one may let fall tears of generosity and joy. We favor the one, and we are overcome by the other; and this is well: but we are not upon any terms to force them: they may flow of their own accord, without derogating from the dignity of a wise man; who at the same time both preserves his gravity, and obeys nature. Nay, there is a certain decorum even in weeping; for excess of sorrow is as foolish as profuse laughter. Why do we not as well cry, when our trees that we took pleasure in, shed their leaves, as at the loss of our satisfactions; when the next season repairs them, either with the same again, or others in their places. We may accuse Fate, but we cannot alter it; for it is hard and inexorable, and not to be removed either with reproaches or tears. They may carry us to the dead, but never bring them back again to us. If reason does not put an end to our sorrows, fortune never will: one is pinched with poverty; another solicited with ambition, and fears the very wealth that he coveted. One is troubled for the loss of children; another for the want of them: so that we shall sooner want tears than matter for them; let us therefore spare that for which we have so much occasion. I do confess, that in the very parting of friends there is something of uneasiness and trouble; but it is rather voluntary than natural; and it is custom more than sense that affects us: we do rather impose a sorrow upon ourselves than submit to it; as people cry when they have company, and when nobody looks on, all is well again. To mourn without measure is folly, and not to mourn at all is insensibility. The best temper is betwixt piety and reason; to be sensible, but neither transported nor cast down. He that can put a stop to his tears and pleasures when he will is safe. It is an equal infelicity to be either too soft or too hard: we are overcome by the one, and put to struggle with the other. There is a certain intemperance in that sorrow that passes the rules of modesty; and yet great piety is, in many cases, a dispensation to good manners. The loss of a son or of a friend, cuts a man to the heart, and there is no opposing the first violence of his passion; but when a man comes once to deliver himself wholly up to lamentations, he is to understand, that though some tears deserve compassion, others are yet ridiculous. A grief that is fresh finds pity and comfort, but when it is inveterate it is laughed at, for it is either counterfeit or foolish. Beside that, to weep excessively for the dead is an affront to the living. The most justifiable cause of mourning is to see good men come to ill ends, and virtue oppressed by the iniquity of Fortune. But in this case, too, they either suffer resolutely, and yield us delight in their courage and example, or meanly, and so give us the less trouble for the loss. He that dies cheerfully, dries up my tears; and he that dies whiningly, does not deserve them. I would bear the death of friends and children with the same constancy that I would expect my own, and no more lament the one than fear the other. He that bethinks himself, how often friends have been parted, will find more time lost among the living, than upon the dead; and the most desperate mourners are they that cared least for their friends when they were living; for they think to redeem their credits, for want of kindness to the living, by extravagant ravings after the dead. Some (I know) will have grief to be only the perverse delight of a restless mind, and sorrows and pleasures to be near akin; and there are, I am confident, that find joy even in their tears. But which is more barbarous, to be insensible of grief for the death of a friend, or to fish for pleasure in grief, when a son perhaps is burning, or a friend expiring? To forget one’s friend, to bury the memory with the body, to lament out of measure, is all inhuman. He that is gone either would not have his friend tormented, or does not know that he is so: if he does not feel it, it is superfluous; if he does, it is unacceptable to him. If reason cannot prevail, reputation may; for immoderate mourning lessens a man’s character: it is a shameful thing for a wise man to make the weariness of grieving the remedy of it. In time, the most stubborn grief will leave us, if in prudence we do not leave that first. But do I grieve for my friend’s sake or for my own? Why should I afflict myself for the loss of him that is either happy or not at all in being? In the one case it is envy, and in the other it is madness. We are apt to say, “What would I give to see him again, and to enjoy his conversation! I was never sad in his company: my heart leaped whenever I met him; I want him wherever I go.” All that is to be said is, “The greater the loss, the greater is the virtue to overcome it.” If grieving will do no good, it is an idle thing to grieve; and if that which has befallen one man remains to all, it is as unjust to complain. The whole world is upon the march towards the same point; why do we not cry for ourselves that are to follow, as well as for him that has gone first? Why do we not as well lament beforehand for that which we know will be, and can not possibly but be? He is not gone, but sent before. As there are many things that he has lost, so there are many things that he does not fear; as anger, jealousy, envy, etc. Is he not more happy in desiring nothing than miserable in what he has lost? We do not mourn for the absent, why then for the dead, who are effectually no other? We have lost one blessing, but we have many left; and shall not all these satisfactions support us against one sorrow? The comfort of having a friend may be taken away, but not that of having had one. As there is a sharpness in some fruits, and a bitterness in some wines that please us, so there is a mixture in the remembrance of friends, where the loss of their company is sweetened again by the contemplation of their virtues. In some respects, I have lost what I had, and in others, I retain still what I have lost. It is an ill construction of Providence to reflect only upon my friend’s being taken away, without any regard to the benefit of his being once given me. Let us therefore make the best of our friends while we have them; for how long we shall keep them is uncertain. I have lost a hopeful son, but how many fathers have been deceived in their expectations! and how many noble families have been destroyed by luxury and riot! He that grieves for the loss of a son, what if he had lost a friend? and yet he that has lost a friend has more cause of joy that he once had him, than of grief that he is taken away. Shall a man bury his friendship with his friend? We are ungrateful for that which is past, in hope of what is to come; as if that which is to come would not quickly be past too. That which is past we are sure of. We may receive satisfaction, it is true, both from the future and what is already past; the one by expectation, and the other by memory; only the one may possibly not come to pass, and it is impossible to make the other not to have been. But there is no applying of consolation to fresh and bleeding sorrow; the very discourse irritates the grief and inflames it. It is like an unseasonable medicine in a disease; when the first violence is over, it will be more tractable, and endure the handling. Those people whose minds are weakened by long felicity may be allowed to groan and complain, but it is otherwise with those that have led their days in misfortunes. A long course of adversity has this good in it, that though it vexes a body a great while, it comes to harden us at last; as a raw soldier shrinks at every wound, and dreads the surgeon more than an enemy; whereas a veteran sees his own body cut and lamed with as little concern as if it were another’s. With the same resolution should we stand the shock and cure of all misfortunes; we are never the better for our experience, if we have not yet learned to be miserable. And there is no thought of curing us by the diversion of sports and entertainments; we are apt to fall into relapses; wherefore we had better overcome our sorrow than delude it.  V. CONSOLATION AGAINST BANISHMENT AND BODILY PAIN. It is a masterpiece to draw good out of evil; and, by the help of virtue, to improve misfortunes into blessings. “It is a sad condition,” you will say, “for a man to be barred the freedom of his own country.” And is not this the case of thousands that we meet every day in the streets? Some for ambition; others, to negotiate, or for curiosity, delight, friendship, study, experience, luxury, vanity, discontent: some to exercise their virtues, others their vices; and not a few to prostitute either their bodies or their eloquence? To pass now from pleasant countries into the worst of islands; let them be never so barren or rocky, the people never so barbarous, or the clime never so intemperate, he that is banished thither shall find many strangers to live there for their pleasure. The mind of man is naturally curious and restless; which is no wonder, considering their divine original; for heavenly things are always in motion: witness the stars, and the orbs, which are perpetually moving, rolling, and changing of place and according to the law and appointment of Nature. But here are no woods, you will say, no rivers, no gold nor pearl, no commodity for traffic or commerce; nay, hardly provision enough to keep the inhabitants from starving. It is very right; here are no palaces, no artificial grottoes, or materials for luxury and excess; but we lie under the protection of Heaven; and a poor cottage for a retreat is more worth than the most magnificent temple, when that cottage is consecrated by an honest man under the guard of his virtue. Shall any man think banishment grievous, when he may take such company along with him! Nor is there any banishment but yields enough for our necessities, and no kingdom is sufficient for superfluities. It is the mind that makes us rich in a desert; and if the body be but kept alive, the soul enjoys all spiritual felicities in abundance. What signifies the being banished from one spot of ground to another, to a man that has his thoughts above, and can look forward and backward, and wherever he pleases; and that, wherever he is, has the same matter to work upon? The body is but the prison or the clog of the mind, subjected to punishments, robberies, diseases; but the mind is sacred and spiritual, and liable to no violence. Is it that, a man shall want garments or covering in banishment? The body is as easily clothed as fed; and Nature has made nothing hard that is necessary. But if nothing will serve us but rich embroideries and scarlet, it is none of Fortune’s fault that we are poor, but our own. Nay, suppose a man should have all restored him back again that he has lost, it will come to nothing, for he will want more after that to satisfy his desires than he did before to supply his necessities. Insatiable appetites are not so much a thirst as a disease. To come lower now; where is the people or nation that have not changed their place of abode? Some by the fate of war; others have been cast by tempests, shipwrecks, or want of provisions, upon unknown coasts. Some have been forced abroad by pestilence, sedition, earthquakes, surcharge of people at home. Some travel to see the world, others for commerce; but, in fine, it is clear, that, upon some reason or other, the whole race of mankind have shifted their quarters; changed their very names as well as their habitations; insomuch that we have lost the very memorials of what they were. All these transportations of people, what are they but public banishments? The very founder of the Roman empire was an exile: briefly, the whole world has been transplanted, and one mutation treads upon the heel of another. That which one man desires, turns another man’s stomach; and he that proscribes me to-day, shall himself be cast out to-morrow. We have, however, this comfort in our misfortune; we have the same nature, the same Providence, and we carry our virtues along with us. And this blessing we owe to that almighty Power, call it what you will; either a God, or an Incorporeal Reason, a Divine Spirit, or Fate, and the unchangeable Course of causes and effects: it is, however, so ordered, that nothing can be taken from us but what we can well spare: and that which is most magnificent and valuable continues with us. Wherever we go, we have the heavens over our heads, and no farther from us than they were before; and so long as we can entertain our eyes and thoughts with those glories, what matter is it what ground we tread upon? In the case of pain or sickness, it is only the body that is affected; it may take off the speed of a footman, or bind the hands of a cobbler, but the mind is still at liberty to hear, learn, teach, advise, and to do other good offices. It is an example of public benefit, a man that is in pain and patient. Virtue may show itself as well in the bed as in the field; and he that cheerfully encounters the terrors of death and corporal anguish, is as great a man as he that most generously hazards himself in a battle. A disease, it is true, bars us of some pleasures, but procures us others. Drink is never so grateful to us as in a burning fever; nor meat, as when we have fasted ourselves sharp and hungry. The patient may be forbidden some sensual satisfaction, but no physician will forbid us the delight of the mind. Shall we call any sick man miserable, because he must give over his intemperance of wine and gluttony, and betake himself to a diet of more sobriety, and less expense; and abandon his luxury, which is the distemper of the mind as well as of the body? It is troublesome, I know, at first, to abstain from the pleasures we have been used to, and to endure hunger and thirst; but in a little time we lose the very appetite, and it is no trouble then to be without that which we do not desire. In diseases there are great pains; but if they be long they remit, and give us some intervals of ease; if short and violent, either they dispatch us, or consume themselves; so that either their respites make them tolerable, or the extremity makes them short. So merciful is Almighty God to us, that our torments cannot be very sharp and lasting. The acutest pains are those that affect the nerves, but there is this comfort in them too, that they will quickly make us stupid and insensible. In cases of extremity, let us call to mind the most eminent instances of patience and courage, and turn our thoughts from our afflictions to the contemplation of virtue. Suppose it be the stone, the gout, nay, the rack itself; how many have endured it without so much as a groan or word speaking; without so much as asking for relief, or giving an answer to a question! Nay, they have laughed at the tormentors upon the very torture, and provoked them to new experiments of their cruelty, which they have had still in derision. The asthma I look upon as of all diseases the most importunate; the physicians call it the meditation of death, as being rather an agony than a sickness; the fit holds one not above an hour, as nobody is long in expiring. Are there not three things grievous in sickness, the fear of death, bodily pain, and the intermission of our pleasures? the first is to be imputed to nature, not to the disease; for we do not die because we are sick, but because we live. Nay, sickness itself has preserved many a man from dying.  . POVERTY TO A WISE MAN IS RATHER A BLESSING THAN A MISFORTUNE. No man shall ever be poor that goes to himself for what he wants; and that is the readiest way to riches. Nature, indeed, will have her due; but yet whatsoever is beyond necessity is precarious, and not necessary. It is not her business to gratify the palate, but to satisfy a craving stomach. Bread, when a man is hungry, does his work, let it be never so coarse; and water when he is dry; let his thirst be quenched, and Nature is satisfied, no matter whence it comes, or whether he drinks in gold, silver, or in the hollow of his hand. To promise a man riches, and to teach him poverty, is to deceive him: but shall I call him poor that wants nothing; though he maybe beholden for it to his patience, rather than to his fortune? Or shall any man deny him to be rich, whose riches can never be taken away? Whether is it better to have much or enough? He that has much desires more, and shows that he has not yet enough; but he that has enough is at rest. Shall a man be reputed the less rich for not having that for which he shall be banished; for which his very wife, or son, shall poison him: that which gives him security in war, and quiet in peace; which he possesses without danger, and disposes of without trouble? No man can be poor that has enough; nor rich, that covets more than he has. Alexander, after all his conquests, complained that he wanted more worlds; he desired something more, even when he had gotten all: and that which was sufficient for human nature was not enough for one man. Money never made any man rich; for the more he had, the more he still coveted. The richest man that ever lived is poor in my opinion, and in any man’s may be so: but he that keeps himself to the stint of Nature, does neither feel poverty nor fear it; nay, even in poverty itself there are some things superfluous. Those which the world calls happy, their felicity is a false splendor, that dazzles the eyes of the vulgar; but our rich man is glorious and happy within. There is no ambition in hunger or thirst: let there be food, and no matter for the table, the dish, and the servants, nor with what meats nature is satisfied. Those are the torments of luxury, that rather stuff the stomach than fill it: it studies rather to cause an appetite than to allay it. It is not for us to say, “This is not handsome; that is common; the other offends my eye.” Nature provides for health, not delicacy. When the trumpet sounds a charge, the poor man knows that he is not aimed at; when they cry out fire, his body is all he has to look after: if he be to take a journey, there is no blocking up of streets, and thronging of passages, for a parting compliment: a small matter fills his belly, and contents his mind: he lives from hand to mouth, without caring or fearing for to-morrow. The temperate rich man is but his counterfeit; his wit is quicker and his appetite calmer. No man finds poverty a trouble to him, but he that thinks it so; and he that thinks it so, makes it so. Does not a rich man travel more at ease with less luggage, and fewer servants? Does he not eat many times as little and as coarse in the field as a poor man? Does he not for his own pleasure, sometimes, and for variety, feed upon the ground, and use only earthen vessels? Is not he a madman then, that always fears what he often desires, and dreads the thing that he takes delight to imitate: he that would know the worst of poverty, let him but compare the looks of the rich and of the poor, and he shall find the poor man to have a smoother brow, and to be more merry at heart; or if any trouble befalls him, it passes over like a cloud: whereas the other, either his good humor is counterfeit, or his melancholy deep and ulcerated, and the worse, because he dares not publicly own his misfortune; but he is forced to play the part of a happy man even with a cancer in his heart. His felicity is but personated; and if he were but stripped of his ornaments, he would be contemptible. In buying of a horse, we take off his clothes and his trappings, and examine his shape and body for fear of being cozened; and shall we put an estimate upon a man for being set off by his fortune and quality? Nay, if we see anything of ornament about him, we are to suspect him the more for some infirmity under it. He that is not content in poverty, would not be so neither in plenty; for the fault is not in the thing, but in the mind. If that be sickly, remove him from a kennel to a palace, he is at the same pass; for he carries his disease along with him. What can be happier than the condition both of mind and of fortune from which we cannot fall—what can be a greater felicity than in a covetous, designing age, for a roan to live safe among informers and thieves? It puts a poor man into the very condition of Providence, that gives all, without reserving anything to itself. How happy is he that owes nothing but to himself, and only that which he can easily refuse or easily pay! I do not reckon him poor that has but a little, but he is so that covets more—it is a fair degree of plenty to have what is necessary. Whether had a man better find satiety in want, or hunger in plenty? It is not the augmenting of our fortunes, but the abating of our appetites that makes us rich. Why may not a man as well contemn riches in his own coffers as in another man’s, and rather hear that they are his than feel them to be so, though it is a great matter not to be corrupted even by having them under the same roof. He is the greater man that is honestly poor in the middle of plenty—but he is the more secure that is free from the temptation of that plenty, and has the least matter for another to design upon. It is no great business for a poor man to preach the contempt of riches, or for a rich man to extol the benefits of poverty, because we do not know how either the one or the other would behave himself in the contrary condition. The best proof is the doing of it by choice and not by necessity; for the practice of poverty in jest is a preparation toward the bearing of it in earnest; but it is yet a generous disposition so to provide for the worst of fortunes as what may be easily borne—the premeditation makes them not only tolerable but delightful to us, for there is that in them without which nothing can be comfortable, that is to say, security. If there were nothing else in poverty but the certain knowledge of our friends, it were yet a most desirable blessing, when every man leaves us but those that love us. It is a shame to place the happiness of life in gold and silver, for which bread and water is sufficient; or, at the worst, hunger puts an end to hunger. For the honor of poverty, it was both the foundation and the cause of the Roman empire; and no man was ever yet so poor but he had enough to carry him to his journey’s end. All I desire is that my property may not be a burden to myself, or make me so to others; and that is the best state of fortune that is neither directly necessitous, nor far from it. A mediocricity of fortune with a gentleness of mind, will preserve us from fear or envy, which is a desirable condition, for no man wants power to do mischief. We never consider the blessing of coveting nothing, and the glory of being full in ourselves, without depending upon Fortune. With parsimony a little is sufficient and without it nothing; whereas frugality makes a poor man rich. If we lose an estate, we had better never have had it—he that has least to lose has least to fear, and those are better satisfied whom Fortune never favored, than those whom she has forsaken. The state is most commodious that lies betwixt poverty and plenty. Diogenes understood this very well when he put himself into an incapacity of losing any thing. That course of life is most commodious which is both safe and wholesome—the body is to be indulged no farther than for health, and rather mortified than not kept in subjection to the mind. It is necessary to provide against hunger, thirst, and cold; and somewhat for a covering to shelter us against other inconveniences; but not a pin matter whether it be of turf or of marble—a man may lie as warm and as dry under a thatched as under a gilded roof. Let the mind be great and glorious, and all other things are despicable in comparison. “The future is uncertain, and I had rather beg of myself not to desire any thing, than of Fortune to bestow it.”
From my grandfather Verus I learned good morals and the government
of my temper. 

From the reputation and remembrance of my father, modesty and a manly
character. 

From my mother, piety and beneficence, and abstinence, not only from
evil deeds, but even from evil thoughts; and further, simplicity in
my way of living, far removed from the habits of the rich.

From my great-grandfather, not to have frequented public schools,
and to have had good teachers at home, and to know that on such things
a man should spend liberally. 

From my governor, to be neither of the green nor of the blue party
at the games in the Circus, nor a partizan either of the Parmularius
or the Scutarius at the gladiators' fights; from him too I learned
endurance of labour, and to want little, and to work with my own hands,
and not to meddle with other people's affairs, and not to be ready
to listen to slander. 

From Diognetus, not to busy myself about trifling things, and not
to give credit to what was said by miracle-workers and jugglers about
incantations and the driving away of daemons and such things; and
not to breed quails for fighting, nor to give myself up passionately
to such things; and to endure freedom of speech; and to have become
intimate with philosophy; and to have been a hearer, first of Bacchius,
then of Tandasis and Marcianus; and to have written dialogues in my
youth; and to have desired a plank bed and skin, and whatever else
of the kind belongs to the Grecian discipline. 

From Rusticus I received the impression that my character required
improvement and discipline; and from him I learned not to be led astray
to sophistic emulation, nor to writing on speculative matters, nor
to delivering little hortatory orations, nor to showing myself off
as a man who practises much discipline, or does benevolent acts in
order to make a display; and to abstain from rhetoric, and poetry,
and fine writing; and not to walk about in the house in my outdoor
dress, nor to do other things of the kind; and to write my letters
with simplicity, like the letter which Rusticus wrote from Sinuessa
to my mother; and with respect to those who have offended me by words,
or done me wrong, to be easily disposed to be pacified and reconciled,
as soon as they have shown a readiness to be reconciled; and to read
carefully, and not to be satisfied with a superficial understanding
of a book; nor hastily to give my assent to those who talk overmuch;
and I am indebted to him for being acquainted with the discourses
of Epictetus, which he communicated to me out of his own collection.

From Apollonius I learned freedom of will and undeviating steadiness
of purpose; and to look to nothing else, not even for a moment, except
to reason; and to be always the same, in sharp pains, on the occasion
of the loss of a child, and in long illness; and to see clearly in
a living example that the same man can be both most resolute and yielding,
and not peevish in giving his instruction; and to have had before
my eyes a man who clearly considered his experience and his skill
in expounding philosophical principles as the smallest of his merits;
and from him I learned how to receive from friends what are esteemed
favours, without being either humbled by them or letting them pass
unnoticed. 

From Sextus, a benevolent disposition, and the example of a family
governed in a fatherly manner, and the idea of living conformably
to nature; and gravity without affectation, and to look carefully
after the interests of friends, and to tolerate ignorant persons,
and those who form opinions without consideration: he had the power
of readily accommodating himself to all, so that intercourse with
him was more agreeable than any flattery; and at the same time he
was most highly venerated by those who associated with him: and he
had the faculty both of discovering and ordering, in an intelligent
and methodical way, the principles necessary for life; and he never
showed anger or any other passion, but was entirely free from passion,
and also most affectionate; and he could express approbation without
noisy display, and he possessed much knowledge without ostentation.

From Alexander the grammarian, to refrain from fault-finding, and
not in a reproachful way to chide those who uttered any barbarous
or solecistic or strange-sounding expression; but dexterously to introduce
the very expression which ought to have been used, and in the way
of answer or giving confirmation, or joining in an inquiry about the
thing itself, not about the word, or by some other fit suggestion.

From Fronto I learned to observe what envy, and duplicity, and hypocrisy
are in a tyrant, and that generally those among us who are called
Patricians are rather deficient in paternal affection. 

From Alexander the Platonic, not frequently nor without necessity
to say to any one, or to write in a letter, that I have no leisure;
nor continually to excuse the neglect of duties required by our relation
to those with whom we live, by alleging urgent occupations.

From Catulus, not to be indifferent when a friend finds fault, even
if he should find fault without reason, but to try to restore him
to his usual disposition; and to be ready to speak well of teachers,
as it is reported of Domitius and Athenodotus; and to love my children
truly. 

From my brother Severus, to love my kin, and to love truth, and to
love justice; and through him I learned to know Thrasea, Helvidius,
Cato, Dion, Brutus; and from him I received the idea of a polity in
which there is the same law for all, a polity administered with regard
to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly
government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed;
I learned from him also consistency and undeviating steadiness in
my regard for philosophy; and a disposition to do good, and to give
to others readily, and to cherish good hopes, and to believe that
I am loved by my friends; and in him I observed no concealment of
his opinions with respect to those whom he condemned, and that his
friends had no need to conjecture what he wished or did not wish,
but it was quite plain. 

From Maximus I learned self-government, and not to be led aside by
anything; and cheerfulness in all circumstances, as well as in illness;
and a just admixture in the moral character of sweetness and dignity,
and to do what was set before me without complaining. I observed that
everybody believed that he thought as he spoke, and that in all that
he did he never had any bad intention; and he never showed amazement
and surprise, and was never in a hurry, and never put off doing a
thing, nor was perplexed nor dejected, nor did he ever laugh to disguise
his vexation, nor, on the other hand, was he ever passionate or suspicious.
He was accustomed to do acts of beneficence, and was ready to forgive,
and was free from all falsehood; and he presented the appearance of
a man who could not be diverted from right rather than of a man who
had been improved. I observed, too, that no man could ever think that
he was despised by Maximus, or ever venture to think himself a better
man. He had also the art of being humorous in an agreeable way.

In my father I observed mildness of temper, and unchangeable resolution
in the things which he had determined after due deliberation; and
no vainglory in those things which men call honours; and a love of
labour and perseverance; and a readiness to listen to those who had
anything to propose for the common weal; and undeviating firmness
in giving to every man according to his deserts; and a knowledge derived
from experience of the occasions for vigorous action and for remission.
And I observed that he had overcome all passion for boys; and he considered
himself no more than any other citizen; and he released his friends
from all obligation to sup with him or to attend him of necessity
when he went abroad, and those who had failed to accompany him, by
reason of any urgent circumstances, always found him the same. I observed
too his habit of careful inquiry in all matters of deliberation, and
his persistency, and that he never stopped his investigation through
being satisfied with appearances which first present themselves; and
that his disposition was to keep his friends, and not to be soon tired
of them, nor yet to be extravagant in his affection; and to be satisfied
on all occasions, and cheerful; and to foresee things a long way off,
and to provide for the smallest without display; and to check immediately
popular applause and all flattery; and to be ever watchful over the
things which were necessary for the administration of the empire,
and to be a good manager of the expenditure, and patiently to endure
the blame which he got for such conduct; and he was neither superstitious
with respect to the gods, nor did he court men by gifts or by trying
to please them, or by flattering the populace; but he showed sobriety
in all things and firmness, and never any mean thoughts or action,
nor love of novelty. And the things which conduce in any way to the
commodity of life, and of which fortune gives an abundant supply,
he used without arrogance and without excusing himself; so that when
he had them, he enjoyed them without affectation, and when he had
them not, he did not want them. No one could ever say of him that
he was either a sophist or a home-bred flippant slave or a pedant;
but every one acknowledged him to be a man ripe, perfect, above flattery,
able to manage his own and other men's affairs. Besides this, he honoured
those who were true philosophers, and he did not reproach those who
pretended to be philosophers, nor yet was he easily led by them. He
was also easy in conversation, and he made himself agreeable without
any offensive affectation. He took a reasonable care of his body's
health, not as one who was greatly attached to life, nor out of regard
to personal appearance, nor yet in a careless way, but so that, through
his own attention, he very seldom stood in need of the physician's
art or of medicine or external applications. He was most ready to
give way without envy to those who possessed any particular faculty,
such as that of eloquence or knowledge of the law or of morals, or
of anything else; and he gave them his help, that each might enjoy
reputation according to his deserts; and he always acted conformably
to the institutions of his country, without showing any affectation
of doing so. Further, he was not fond of change nor unsteady, but
he loved to stay in the same places, and to employ himself about the
same things; and after his paroxysms of headache he came immediately
fresh and vigorous to his usual occupations. His secrets were not
but very few and very rare, and these only about public matters; and
he showed prudence and economy in the exhibition of the public spectacles
and the construction of public buildings, his donations to the people,
and in such things, for he was a man who looked to what ought to be
done, not to the reputation which is got by a man's acts. He did not
take the bath at unseasonable hours; he was not fond of building houses,
nor curious about what he ate, nor about the texture and colour of
his clothes, nor about the beauty of his slaves. His dress came from
Lorium, his villa on the coast, and from Lanuvium generally. We know
how he behaved to the toll-collector at Tusculum who asked his pardon;
and such was all his behaviour. There was in him nothing harsh, nor
implacable, nor violent, nor, as one may say, anything carried to
the sweating point; but he examined all things severally, as if he
had abundance of time, and without confusion, in an orderly way, vigorously
and consistently. And that might be applied to him which is recorded
of Socrates, that he was able both to abstain from, and to enjoy,
those things which many are too weak to abstain from, and cannot enjoy
without excess. But to be strong enough both to bear the one and to
be sober in the other is the mark of a man who has a perfect and invincible
soul, such as he showed in the illness of Maximus. 

To the gods I am indebted for having good grandfathers, good parents,
a good sister, good teachers, good associates, good kinsmen and friends,
nearly everything good. Further, I owe it to the gods that I was not
hurried into any offence against any of them, though I had a disposition
which, if opportunity had offered, might have led me to do something
of this kind; but, through their favour, there never was such a concurrence
of circumstances as put me to the trial. Further, I am thankful to
the gods that I was not longer brought up with my grandfather's concubine,
and that I preserved the flower of my youth, and that I did not make
proof of my virility before the proper season, but even deferred the
time; that I was subjected to a ruler and a father who was able to
take away all pride from me, and to bring me to the knowledge that
it is possible for a man to live in a palace without wanting either
guards or embroidered dresses, or torches and statues, and such-like
show; but that it is in such a man's power to bring himself very near
to the fashion of a private person, without being for this reason
either meaner in thought, or more remiss in action, with respect to
the things which must be done for the public interest in a manner
that befits a ruler. I thank the gods for giving me such a brother,
who was able by his moral character to rouse me to vigilance over
myself, and who, at the same time, pleased me by his respect and affection;
that my children have not been stupid nor deformed in body; that I
did not make more proficiency in rhetoric, poetry, and the other studies,
in which I should perhaps have been completely engaged, if I had seen
that I was making progress in them; that I made haste to place those
who brought me up in the station of honour, which they seemed to desire,
without putting them off with hope of my doing it some time after,
because they were then still young; that I knew Apollonius, Rusticus,
Maximus; that I received clear and frequent impressions about living
according to nature, and what kind of a life that is, so that, so
far as depended on the gods, and their gifts, and help, and inspirations,
nothing hindered me from forthwith living according to nature, though
I still fall short of it through my own fault, and through not observing
the admonitions of the gods, and, I may almost say, their direct instructions;
that my body has held out so long in such a kind of life; that I never
touched either Benedicta or Theodotus, and that, after having fallen
into amatory passions, I was cured; and, though I was often out of
humour with Rusticus, I never did anything of which I had occasion
to repent; that, though it was my mother's fate to die young, she
spent the last years of her life with me; that, whenever I wished
to help any man in his need, or on any other occasion, I was never
told that I had not the means of doing it; and that to myself the
same necessity never happened, to receive anything from another; that
I have such a wife, so obedient, and so affectionate, and so simple;
that I had abundance of good masters for my children; and that remedies
have been shown to me by dreams, both others, and against bloodspitting
and giddiness...; and that, when I had an inclination to philosophy,
I did not fall into the hands of any sophist, and that I did not waste
my time on writers of histories, or in the resolution of syllogisms,
or occupy myself about the investigation of appearances in the heavens;
for all these things require the help of the gods and fortune.

Among the Quadi at the Granua. 

Begin the morning by saying to thyself, I shall meet with the busy-body,
the ungrateful, arrogant, deceitful, envious, unsocial. All these
things happen to them by reason of their ignorance of what is good
and evil. But I who have seen the nature of the good that it is beautiful,
and of the bad that it is ugly, and the nature of him who does wrong,
that it is akin to me, not only of the same blood or seed, but that
it participates in the same intelligence and the same portion of the
divinity, I can neither be injured by any of them, for no one can
fix on me what is ugly, nor can I be angry with my kinsman, nor hate
him, For we are made for co-operation, like feet, like hands, like
eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth. To act against
one another then is contrary to nature; and it is acting against one
another to be vexed and to turn away. 

Whatever this is that I am, it is a little flesh and breath, and the
ruling part. Throw away thy books; no longer distract thyself: it
is not allowed; but as if thou wast now dying, despise the flesh;
it is blood and bones and a network, a contexture of nerves, veins,
and arteries. See the breath also, what kind of a thing it is, air,
and not always the same, but every moment sent out and again sucked
in. The third then is the ruling part: consider thus: Thou art an
old man; no longer let this be a slave, no longer be pulled by the
strings like a puppet to unsocial movements, no longer either be dissatisfied
with thy present lot, or shrink from the future. 

All that is from the gods is full of Providence. That which is from
fortune is not separated from nature or without an interweaving and
involution with the things which are ordered by Providence. From thence
all things flow; and there is besides necessity, and that which is
for the advantage of the whole universe, of which thou art a part.
But that is good for every part of nature which the nature of the
whole brings, and what serves to maintain this nature. Now the universe
is preserved, as by the changes of the elements so by the changes
of things compounded of the elements. Let these principles be enough
for thee, let them always be fixed opinions. But cast away the thirst
after books, that thou mayest not die murmuring, but cheerfully, truly,
and from thy heart thankful to the gods. 

Remember how long thou hast been putting off these things, and how
often thou hast received an opportunity from the gods, and yet dost
not use it. Thou must now at last perceive of what universe thou art
a part, and of what administrator of the universe thy existence is
an efflux, and that a limit of time is fixed for thee, which if thou
dost not use for clearing away the clouds from thy mind, it will go
and thou wilt go, and it will never return. 

Every moment think steadily as a Roman and a man to do what thou hast
in hand with perfect and simple dignity, and feeling of affection,
and freedom, and justice; and to give thyself relief from all other
thoughts. And thou wilt give thyself relief, if thou doest every act
of thy life as if it were the last, laying aside all carelessness
and passionate aversion from the commands of reason, and all hypocrisy,
and self-love, and discontent with the portion which has been given
to thee. Thou seest how few the things are, the which if a man lays
hold of, he is able to live a life which flows in quiet, and is like
the existence of the gods; for the gods on their part will require
nothing more from him who observes these things. 

Do wrong to thyself, do wrong to thyself, my soul; but thou wilt no
longer have the opportunity of honouring thyself. Every man's life
is sufficient. But thine is nearly finished, though thy soul reverences
not itself but places thy felicity in the souls of others.

Do the things external which fall upon thee distract thee? Give thyself
time to learn something new and good, and cease to be whirled around.
But then thou must also avoid being carried about the other way. For
those too are triflers who have wearied themselves in life by their
activity, and yet have no object to which to direct every movement,
and, in a word, all their thoughts. 

Through not observing what is in the mind of another a man has seldom
been seen to be unhappy; but those who do not observe the movements
of their own minds must of necessity be unhappy. 

This thou must always bear in mind, what is the nature of the whole,
and what is my nature, and how this is related to that, and what kind
of a part it is of what kind of a whole; and that there is no one
who hinders thee from always doing and saying the things which are
according to the nature of which thou art a part. 

Theophrastus, in his comparison of bad acts- such a comparison as
one would make in accordance with the common notions of mankind- says,
like a true philosopher, that the offences which are committed through
desire are more blameable than those which are committed through anger.
For he who is excited by anger seems to turn away from reason with
a certain pain and unconscious contraction; but he who offends through
desire, being overpowered by pleasure, seems to be in a manner more
intemperate and more womanish in his offences. Rightly then, and in
a way worthy of philosophy, he said that the offence which is committed
with pleasure is more blameable than that which is committed with
pain; and on the whole the one is more like a person who has been
first wronged and through pain is compelled to be angry; but the other
is moved by his own impulse to do wrong, being carried towards doing
something by desire. 

Since it is possible that thou mayest depart from life this very moment,
regulate every act and thought accordingly. But to go away from among
men, if there are gods, is not a thing to be afraid of, for the gods
will not involve thee in evil; but if indeed they do not exist, or
if they have no concern about human affairs, what is it to me to live
in a universe devoid of gods or devoid of Providence? But in truth
they do exist, and they do care for human things, and they have put
all the means in man's power to enable him not to fall into real evils.
And as to the rest, if there was anything evil, they would have provided
for this also, that it should be altogether in a man's power not to
fall into it. Now that which does not make a man worse, how can it
make a man's life worse? But neither through ignorance, nor having
the knowledge, but not the power to guard against or correct these
things, is it possible that the nature of the universe has overlooked
them; nor is it possible that it has made so great a mistake, either
through want of power or want of skill, that good and evil should
happen indiscriminately to the good and the bad. But death certainly,
and life, honour and dishonour, pain and pleasure, all these things
equally happen to good men and bad, being things which make us neither
better nor worse. Therefore they are neither good nor evil.

How quickly all things disappear, in the universe the bodies themselves,
but in time the remembrance of them; what is the nature of all sensible
things, and particularly those which attract with the bait of pleasure
or terrify by pain, or are noised abroad by vapoury fame; how worthless,
and contemptible, and sordid, and perishable, and dead they are- all
this it is the part of the intellectual faculty to observe. To observe
too who these are whose opinions and voices give reputation; what
death is, and the fact that, if a man looks at it in itself, and by
the abstractive power of reflection resolves into their parts all
the things which present themselves to the imagination in it, he will
then consider it to be nothing else than an operation of nature; and
if any one is afraid of an operation of nature, he is a child. This,
however, is not only an operation of nature, but it is also a thing
which conduces to the purposes of nature. To observe too how man comes
near to the deity, and by what part of him, and when this part of
man is so disposed. 

Nothing is more wretched than a man who traverses everything in a
round, and pries into the things beneath the earth, as the poet says,
and seeks by conjecture what is in the minds of his neighbours, without
perceiving that it is sufficient to attend to the daemon within him,
and to reverence it sincerely. And reverence of the daemon consists
in keeping it pure from passion and thoughtlessness, and dissatisfaction
with what comes from gods and men. For the things from the gods merit
veneration for their excellence; and the things from men should be
dear to us by reason of kinship; and sometimes even, in a manner,
they move our pity by reason of men's ignorance of good and bad; this
defect being not less than that which deprives us of the power of
distinguishing things that are white and black. 

Though thou shouldst be going to live three thousand years, and as
many times ten thousand years, still remember that no man loses any
other life than this which he now lives, nor lives any other than
this which he now loses. The longest and shortest are thus brought
to the same. For the present is the same to all, though that which
perishes is not the same; and so that which is lost appears to be
a mere moment. For a man cannot lose either the past or the future:
for what a man has not, how can any one take this from him? These
two things then thou must bear in mind; the one, that all things from
eternity are of like forms and come round in a circle, and that it
makes no difference whether a man shall see the same things during
a hundred years or two hundred, or an infinite time; and the second,
that the longest liver and he who will die soonest lose just the same.
For the present is the only thing of which a man can be deprived,
if it is true that this is the only thing which he has, and that a
man cannot lose a thing if he has it not. 

Remember that all is opinion. For what was said by the Cynic Monimus
is manifest: and manifest too is the use of what was said, if a man
receives what may be got out of it as far as it is true.

The soul of man does violence to itself, first of all, when it becomes
an abscess and, as it were, a tumour on the universe, so far as it
can. For to be vexed at anything which happens is a separation of
ourselves from nature, in some part of which the natures of all other
things are contained. In the next place, the soul does violence to
itself when it turns away from any man, or even moves towards him
with the intention of injuring, such as are the souls of those who
are angry. In the third place, the soul does violence to itself when
it is overpowered by pleasure or by pain. Fourthly, when it plays
a part, and does or says anything insincerely and untruly. Fifthly,
when it allows any act of its own and any movement to be without an
aim, and does anything thoughtlessly and without considering what
it is, it being right that even the smallest things be done with reference
to an end; and the end of rational animals is to follow the reason
and the law of the most ancient city and polity. 

Of human life the time is a point, and the substance is in a flux,
and the perception dull, and the composition of the whole body subject
to putrefaction, and the soul a whirl, and fortune hard to divine,
and fame a thing devoid of judgement. And, to say all in a word, everything
which belongs to the body is a stream, and what belongs to the soul
is a dream and vapour, and life is a warfare and a stranger's sojourn,
and after-fame is oblivion. What then is that which is able to conduct
a man? One thing and only one, philosophy. But this consists in keeping
the daemon within a man free from violence and unharmed, superior
to pains and pleasures, doing nothing without purpose, nor yet falsely
and with hypocrisy, not feeling the need of another man's doing or
not doing anything; and besides, accepting all that happens, and all
that is allotted, as coming from thence, wherever it is, from whence
he himself came; and, finally, waiting for death with a cheerful mind,
as being nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which
every living being is compounded. But if there is no harm to the elements
themselves in each continually changing into another, why should a
man have any apprehension about the change and dissolution of all
the elements? For it is according to nature, and nothing is evil which
is according to nature. 

This in Carnuntum. 

We ught to consider not only that our life is daily wasting away
and a smaller part of it is left, but another thing also must be taken
into the account, that if a man should live longer, it is quite uncertain
whether the understanding will still continue sufficient for the comprehension
of things, and retain the power of contemplation which strives to
acquire the knowledge of the divine and the human. For if he shall
begin to fall into dotage, perspiration and nutrition and imagination
and appetite, and whatever else there is of the kind, will not fail;
but the power of making use of ourselves, and filling up the measure
of our duty, and clearly separating all appearances, and considering
whether a man should now depart from life, and whatever else of the
kind absolutely requires a disciplined reason, all this is already
extinguished. We must make haste then, not only because we are daily
nearer to death, but also because the conception of things and the
understanding of them cease first. 

We ought to observe also that even the things which follow after the
things which are produced according to nature contain something pleasing
and attractive. For instance, when bread is baked some parts are split
at the surface, and these parts which thus open, and have a certain
fashion contrary to the purpose of the baker's art, are beautiful
in a manner, and in a peculiar way excite a desire for eating. And
again, figs, when they are quite ripe, gape open; and in the ripe
olives the very circumstance of their being near to rottenness adds
a peculiar beauty to the fruit. And the ears of corn bending down,
and the lion's eyebrows, and the foam which flows from the mouth of
wild boars, and many other things- though they are far from being
beautiful, if a man should examine them severally- still, because
they are consequent upon the things which are formed by nature, help
to adorn them, and they please the mind; so that if a man should have
a feeling and deeper insight with respect to the things which are
produced in the universe, there is hardly one of those which follow
by way of consequence which will not seem to him to be in a manner
disposed so as to give pleasure. And so he will see even the real
gaping jaws of wild beasts with no less pleasure than those which
painters and sculptors show by imitation; and in an old woman and
an old man he will be able to see a certain maturity and comeliness;
and the attractive loveliness of young persons he will be able to
look on with chaste eyes; and many such things will present themselves,
not pleasing to every man, but to him only who has become truly familiar
with nature and her works. 

Hippocrates after curing many diseases himself fell sick and died.
The Chaldaei foretold the deaths of many, and then fate caught them
too. Alexander, and Pompeius, and Caius Caesar, after so often completely
destroying whole cities, and in battle cutting to pieces many ten
thousands of cavalry and infantry, themselves too at last departed
from life. Heraclitus, after so many speculations on the conflagration
of the universe, was filled with water internally and died smeared
all over with mud. And lice destroyed Democritus; and other lice killed
Socrates. What means all this? Thou hast embarked, thou hast made
the voyage, thou art come to shore; get out. If indeed to another
life, there is no want of gods, not even there. But if to a state
without sensation, thou wilt cease to be held by pains and pleasures,
and to be a slave to the vessel, which is as much inferior as that
which serves it is superior: for the one is intelligence and deity;
the other is earth and corruption. 

Do not waste the remainder of thy life in thoughts about others, when
thou dost not refer thy thoughts to some object of common utility.
For thou losest the opportunity of doing something else when thou
hast such thoughts as these, What is such a person doing, and why,
and what is he saying, and what is he thinking of, and what is he
contriving, and whatever else of the kind makes us wander away from
the observation of our own ruling power. We ought then to check in
the series of our thoughts everything that is without a purpose and
useless, but most of all the over-curious feeling and the malignant;
and a man should use himself to think of those things only about which
if one should suddenly ask, What hast thou now in thy thoughts? With
perfect openness thou mightest, immediately answer, This or That;
so that from thy words it should be plain that everything in thee
is simple and benevolent, and such as befits a social animal, and
one that cares not for thoughts about pleasure or sensual enjoyments
at all, nor has any rivalry or envy and suspicion, or anything else
for which thou wouldst blush if thou shouldst say that thou hadst
it in thy mind. For the man who is such and no longer delays being
among the number of the best, is like a priest and minister of the
gods, using too the deity which is planted within him, which makes
the man uncontaminated by pleasure, unharmed by any pain, untouched
by any insult, feeling no wrong, a fighter in the noblest fight, one
who cannot be overpowered by any passion, dyed deep with justice,
accepting with all his soul everything which happens and is assigned
to him as his portion; and not often, nor yet without great necessity
and for the general interest, imagining what another says, or does,
or thinks. For it is only what belongs to himself that he makes the
matter for his activity; and he constantly thinks of that which is
allotted to himself out of the sum total of things, and he makes his
own acts fair, and he is persuaded that his own portion is good. For
the lot which is assigned to each man is carried along with him and
carries him along with it. And he remembers also that every rational
animal is his kinsman, and that to care for all men is according to
man's nature; and a man should hold on to the opinion not of all,
but of those only who confessedly live according to nature. But as
to those who live not so, he always bears in mind what kind of men
they are both at home and from home, both by night and by day, and
what they are, and with what men they live an impure life. Accordingly,
he does not value at all the praise which comes from such men, since
they are not even satisfied with themselves. 

Labour not unwillingly, nor without regard to the common interest,
nor without due consideration, nor with distraction; nor let studied
ornament set off thy thoughts, and be not either a man of many words,
or busy about too many things. And further, let the deity which is
in thee be the guardian of a living being, manly and of ripe age,
and engaged in matter political, and a Roman, and a ruler, who has
taken his post like a man waiting for the signal which summons him
from life, and ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of any
man's testimony. Be cheerful also, and seek not external help nor
the tranquility which others give. A man then must stand erect, not
be kept erect by others. 

If thou findest in human life anything better than justice, truth,
temperance, fortitude, and, in a word, anything better than thy own
mind's self-satisfaction in the things which it enables thee to do
according to right reason, and in the condition that is assigned to
thee without thy own choice; if, I say, thou seest anything better
than this, turn to it with all thy soul, and enjoy that which thou
hast found to be the best. But if nothing appears to be better than
the deity which is planted in thee, which has subjected to itself
all thy appetites, and carefully examines all the impressions, and,
as Socrates said, has detached itself from the persuasions of sense,
and has submitted itself to the gods, and cares for mankind; if thou
findest everything else smaller and of less value than this, give
place to nothing else, for if thou dost once diverge and incline to
it, thou wilt no longer without distraction be able to give the preference
to that good thing which is thy proper possession and thy own; for
it is not right that anything of any other kind, such as praise from
the many, or power, or enjoyment of pleasure, should come into competition
with that which is rationally and politically or practically good.
All these things, even though they may seem to adapt themselves to
the better things in a small degree, obtain the superiority all at
once, and carry us away. But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose
the better, and hold to it.- But that which is useful is the better.-
Well then, if it is useful to thee as a rational being, keep to it;
but if it is only useful to thee as an animal, say so, and maintain
thy judgement without arrogance: only take care that thou makest the
inquiry by a sure method. 

Never value anything as profitable to thyself which shall compel thee
to break thy promise, to lose thy self-respect, to hate any man, to
suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite, to desire anything which
needs walls and curtains: for he who has preferred to everything intelligence
and daemon and the worship of its excellence, acts no tragic part,
does not groan, will not need either solitude or much company; and,
what is chief of all, he will live without either pursuing or flying
from death; but whether for a longer or a shorter time he shall have
the soul inclosed in the body, he cares not at all: for even if he
must depart immediately, he will go as readily as if he were going
to do anything else which can be done with decency and order; taking
care of this only all through life, that his thoughts turn not away
from anything which belongs to an intelligent animal and a member
of a civil community. 

In the mind of one who is chastened and purified thou wilt find no
corrupt matter, nor impurity, nor any sore skinned over. Nor is his
life incomplete when fate overtakes him, as one may say of an actor
who leaves the stage before ending and finishing the play. Besides,
there is in him nothing servile, nor affected, nor too closely bound
to other things, nor yet detached from other things, nothing worthy
of blame, nothing which seeks a hiding-place. 

Reverence the faculty which produces opinion. On this faculty it entirely
depends whether there shall exist in thy ruling part any opinion inconsistent
with nature and the constitution of the rational animal. And this
faculty promises freedom from hasty judgement, and friendship towards
men, and obedience to the gods. 

Throwing away then all things, hold to these only which are few; and
besides bear in mind that every man lives only this present time,
which is an indivisible point, and that all the rest of his life is
either past or it is uncertain. Short then is the time which every
man lives, and small the nook of the earth where he lives; and short
too the longest posthumous fame, and even this only continued by a
succession of poor human beings, who will very soon die, and who know
not even themselves, much less him who died long ago. 

To the aids which have been mentioned let this one still be added:-
Make for thyself a definition or description of the thing which is
presented to thee, so as to see distinctly what kind of a thing it
is in its substance, in its nudity, in its complete entirety, and
tell thyself its proper name, and the names of the things of which
it has been compounded, and into which it will be resolved. For nothing
is so productive of elevation of mind as to be able to examine methodically
and truly every object which is presented to thee in life, and always
to look at things so as to see at the same time what kind of universe
this is, and what kind of use everything performs in it, and what
value everything has with reference to the whole, and what with reference
to man, who is a citizen of the highest city, of which all other cities
are like families; what each thing is, and of what it is composed,
and how long it is the nature of this thing to endure which now makes
an impression on me, and what virtue I have need of with respect to
it, such as gentleness, manliness, truth, fidelity, simplicity, contentment,
and the rest. Wherefore, on every occasion a man should say: this
comes from God; and this is according to the apportionment and spinning
of the thread of destiny, and such-like coincidence and chance; and
this is from one of the same stock, and a kinsman and partner, one
who knows not however what is according to his nature. But I know;
for this reason I behave towards him according to the natural law
of fellowship with benevolence and justice. At the same time however
in things indifferent I attempt to ascertain the value of each.

If thou workest at that which is before thee, following right reason
seriously, vigorously, calmly, without allowing anything else to distract
thee, but keeping thy divine part pure, as if thou shouldst be bound
to give it back immediately; if thou holdest to this, expecting nothing,
fearing nothing, but satisfied with thy present activity according
to nature, and with heroic truth in every word and sound which thou
utterest, thou wilt live happy. And there is no man who is able to
prevent this. 

As physicians have always their instruments and knives ready for cases
which suddenly require their skill, so do thou have principles ready
for the understanding of things divine and human, and for doing everything,
even the smallest, with a recollection of the bond which unites the
divine and human to one another. For neither wilt thou do anything
well which pertains to man without at the same time having a reference
to things divine; nor the contrary. 

No longer wander at hazard; for neither wilt thou read thy own memoirs,
nor the acts of the ancient Romans and Hellenes, and the selections
from books which thou wast reserving for thy old age. Hasten then
to the end which thou hast before thee, and throwing away idle hopes,
come to thy own aid, if thou carest at all for thyself, while it is
in thy power. 

They know not how many things are signified by the words stealing,
sowing, buying, keeping quiet, seeing what ought to be done; for this
is not effected by the eyes, but by another kind of vision.

Body, soul, intelligence: to the body belong sensations, to the soul
appetites, to the intelligence principles. To receive the impressions
of forms by means of appearances belongs even to animals; to be pulled
by the strings of desire belongs both to wild beasts and to men who
have made themselves into women, and to a Phalaris and a Nero: and
to have the intelligence that guides to the things which appear suitable
belongs also to those who do not believe in the gods, and who betray
their country, and do their impure deeds when they have shut the doors.
If then everything else is common to all that I have mentioned, there
remains that which is peculiar to the good man, to be pleased and
content with what happens, and with the thread which is spun for him;
and not to defile the divinity which is planted in his breast, nor
disturb it by a crowd of images, but to preserve it tranquil, following
it obediently as a god, neither saying anything contrary to the truth,
nor doing anything contrary to justice. And if all men refuse to believe
that he lives a simple, modest, and contented life, he is neither
angry with any of them, nor does he deviate from the way which leads
to the end of life, to which a man ought to come pure, tranquil, ready
to depart, and without any compulsion perfectly reconciled to his
lot. 

That which rules within, when it is according to nature, is so affected
with respect to the events which happen, that it always easily adapts
itself to that which is and is presented to it. For it requires no
definite material, but it moves towards its purpose, under certain
conditions however; and it makes a material for itself out of that
which opposes it, as fire lays hold of what falls into it, by which
a small light would have been extinguished: but when the fire is strong,
it soon appropriates to itself the matter which is heaped on it, and
consumes it, and rises higher by means of this very material.

Let no act be done without a purpose, nor otherwise than according
to the perfect principles of art. 

Men seek retreats for themselves, houses in the country, sea-shores,
and mountains; and thou too art wont to desire such things very much.
But this is altogether a mark of the most common sort of men, for
it is in thy power whenever thou shalt choose to retire into thyself.
For nowhere either with more quiet or more freedom from trouble does
a man retire than into his own soul, particularly when he has within
him such thoughts that by looking into them he is immediately in perfect
tranquility; and I affirm that tranquility is nothing else than the
good ordering of the mind. Constantly then give to thyself this retreat,
and renew thyself; and let thy principles be brief and fundamental,
which, as soon as thou shalt recur to them, will be sufficient to
cleanse the soul completely, and to send thee back free from all discontent
with the things to which thou returnest. For with what art thou discontented?
With the badness of men? Recall to thy mind this conclusion, that
rational animals exist for one another, and that to endure is a part
of justice, and that men do wrong involuntarily; and consider how
many already, after mutual enmity, suspicion, hatred, and fighting,
have been stretched dead, reduced to ashes; and be quiet at last.-
But perhaps thou art dissatisfied with that which is assigned to thee
out of the universe.- Recall to thy recollection this alternative;
either there is providence or atoms, fortuitous concurrence of things;
or remember the arguments by which it has been proved that the world
is a kind of political community, and be quiet at last.- But perhaps
corporeal things will still fasten upon thee.- Consider then further
that the mind mingles not with the breath, whether moving gently or
violently, when it has once drawn itself apart and discovered its
own power, and think also of all that thou hast heard and assented
to about pain and pleasure, and be quiet at last.- But perhaps the
desire of the thing called fame will torment thee.- See how soon everything
is forgotten, and look at the chaos of infinite time on each side
of the present, and the emptiness of applause, and the changeableness
and want of judgement in those who pretend to give praise, and the
narrowness of the space within which it is circumscribed, and be quiet
at last. For the whole earth is a point, and how small a nook in it
is this thy dwelling, and how few are there in it, and what kind of
people are they who will praise thee. 

This then remains: Remember to retire into this little territory of
thy own, and above all do not distract or strain thyself, but be free,
and look at things as a man, as a human being, as a citizen, as a
mortal. But among the things readiest to thy hand to which thou shalt
turn, let there be these, which are two. One is that things do not
touch the soul, for they are external and remain immovable; but our
perturbations come only from the opinion which is within. The other
is that all these things, which thou seest, change immediately and
will no longer be; and constantly bear in mind how many of these changes
thou hast already witnessed. The universe is transformation: life
is opinion. 

If our intellectual part is common, the reason also, in respect of
which we are rational beings, is common: if this is so, common also
is the reason which commands us what to do, and what not to do; if
this is so, there is a common law also; if this is so, we are fellow-citizens;
if this is so, we are members of some political community; if this
is so, the world is in a manner a state. For of what other common
political community will any one say that the whole human race are
members? And from thence, from this common political community comes
also our very intellectual faculty and reasoning faculty and our capacity
for law; or whence do they come? For as my earthly part is a portion
given to me from certain earth, and that which is watery from another
element, and that which is hot and fiery from some peculiar source
(for nothing comes out of that which is nothing, as nothing also returns
to non-existence), so also the intellectual part comes from some source.

Death is such as generation is, a mystery of nature; a composition
out of the same elements, and a decomposition into the same; and altogether
not a thing of which any man should be ashamed, for it is not contrary
to the nature of a reasonable animal, and not contrary to the reason
of our constitution. 

It is natural that these things should be done by such persons, it
is a matter of necessity; and if a man will not have it so, he will
not allow the fig-tree to have juice. But by all means bear this in
mind, that within a very short time both thou and he will be dead;
and soon not even your names will be left behind. 

Take away thy opinion, and then there is taken away the complaint,
"I have been harmed." Take away the complaint, "I have been harmed,"
and the harm is taken away. 

That which does not make a man worse than he was, also does not make
his life worse, nor does it harm him either from without or from within.

The nature of that which is universally useful has been compelled
to do this. 

Consider that everything which happens, happens justly, and if thou
observest carefully, thou wilt find it to be so. I do not say only
with respect to the continuity of the series of things, but with respect
to what is just, and as if it were done by one who assigns to each
thing its value. Observe then as thou hast begun; and whatever thou
doest, do it in conjunction with this, the being good, and in the
sense in which a man is properly understood to be good. Keep to this
in every action. 

Do not have such an opinion of things as he has who does thee wrong,
or such as he wishes thee to have, but look at them as they are in
truth. 

A man should always have these two rules in readiness; the one, to
do only whatever the reason of the ruling and legislating faculty
may suggest for the use of men; the other, to change thy opinion,
if there is any one at hand who sets thee right and moves thee from
any opinion. But this change of opinion must proceed only from a certain
persuasion, as of what is just or of common advantage, and the like,
not because it appears pleasant or brings reputation. 

Hast thou reason? I have.- Why then dost not thou use it? For if this
does its own work, what else dost thou wish? 

Thou hast existed as a part. Thou shalt disappear in that which produced
thee; but rather thou shalt be received back into its seminal principle
by transmutation. 

Many grains of frankincense on the same altar: one falls before, another
falls after; but it makes no difference. 

Within ten days thou wilt seem a god to those to whom thou art now
a beast and an ape, if thou wilt return to thy principles and the
worship of reason. 

Do not act as if thou wert going to live ten thousand years. Death
hangs over thee. While thou livest, while it is in thy power, be good.

How much trouble he avoids who does not look to see what his neighbour
says or does or thinks, but only to what he does himself, that it
may be just and pure; or as Agathon says, look not round at the depraved
morals of others, but run straight along the line without deviating
from it. 

He who has a vehement desire for posthumous fame does not consider
that every one of those who remember him will himself also die very
soon; then again also they who have succeeded them, until the whole
remembrance shall have been extinguished as it is transmitted through
men who foolishly admire and perish. But suppose that those who will
remember are even immortal, and that the remembrance will be immortal,
what then is this to thee? And I say not what is it to the dead, but
what is it to the living? What is praise except indeed so far as it
has a certain utility? For thou now rejectest unseasonably the gift
of nature, clinging to something else... 

Everything which is in any way beautiful is beautiful in itself, and
terminates in itself, not having praise as part of itself. Neither
worse then nor better is a thing made by being praised. I affirm this
also of the things which are called beautiful by the vulgar, for example,
material things and works of art. That which is really beautiful has
no need of anything; not more than law, not more than truth, not more
than benevolence or modesty. Which of these things is beautiful because
it is praised, or spoiled by being blamed? Is such a thing as an emerald
made worse than it was, if it is not praised? Or gold, ivory, purple,
a lyre, a little knife, a flower, a shrub? 

If souls continue to exist, how does the air contain them from eternity?-
But how does the earth contain the bodies of those who have been buried
from time so remote? For as here the mutation of these bodies after
a certain continuance, whatever it may be, and their dissolution make
room for other dead bodies; so the souls which are removed into the
air after subsisting for some time are transmuted and diffused, and
assume a fiery nature by being received into the seminal intelligence
of the universe, and in this way make room for the fresh souls which
come to dwell there. And this is the answer which a man might give
on the hypothesis of souls continuing to exist. But we must not only
think of the number of bodies which are thus buried, but also of the
number of animals which are daily eaten by us and the other animals.
For what a number is consumed, and thus in a manner buried in the
bodies of those who feed on them! And nevertheless this earth receives
them by reason of the changes of these bodies into blood, and the
transformations into the aerial or the fiery element. 

What is the investigation into the truth in this matter? The division
into that which is material and that which is the cause of form, the
formal. 

Do not be whirled about, but in every movement have respect to justice,
and on the occasion of every impression maintain the faculty of comprehension
or understanding. 

Everything harmonizes with me, which is harmonious to thee, O Universe.
Nothing for me is too early nor too late, which is in due time for
thee. Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons bring, O Nature:
from thee are all things, in thee are all things, to thee all things
return. The poet says, Dear city of Cecrops; and wilt not thou say,
Dear city of Zeus? 

Occupy thyself with few things, says the philosopher, if thou wouldst
be tranquil.- But consider if it would not be better to say, Do what
is necessary, and whatever the reason of the animal which is naturally
social requires, and as it requires. For this brings not only the
tranquility which comes from doing well, but also that which comes
from doing few things. For the greatest part of what we say and do
being unnecessary, if a man takes this away, he will have more leisure
and less uneasiness. Accordingly on every occasion a man should ask
himself, Is this one of the unnecessary things? Now a man should take
away not only unnecessary acts, but also, unnecessary thoughts, for
thus superfluous acts will not follow after. 

Try how the life of the good man suits thee, the life of him who is
satisfied with his portion out of the whole, and satisfied with his
own just acts and benevolent disposition. 

Hast thou seen those things? Look also at these. Do not disturb thyself.
Make thyself all simplicity. Does any one do wrong? It is to himself
that he does the wrong. Has anything happened to thee? Well; out of
the universe from the beginning everything which happens has been
apportioned and spun out to thee. In a word, thy life is short. Thou
must turn to profit the present by the aid of reason and justice.
Be sober in thy relaxation. 

Either it is a well-arranged universe or a chaos huddled together,
but still a universe. But can a certain order subsist in thee, and
disorder in the All? And this too when all things are so separated
and diffused and sympathetic. 

A black character, a womanish character, a stubborn character, bestial,
childish, animal, stupid, counterfeit, scurrilous, fraudulent, tyrannical.

If he is a stranger to the universe who does not know what is in it,
no less is he a stranger who does not know what is going on in it.
He is a runaway, who flies from social reason; he is blind, who shuts
the eyes of the understanding; he is poor, who has need of another,
and has not from himself all things which are useful for life. He
is an abscess on the universe who withdraws and separates himself
from the reason of our common nature through being displeased with
the things which happen, for the same nature produces this, and has
produced thee too: he is a piece rent asunder from the state, who
tears his own soul from that of reasonable animals, which is one.

The one is a philosopher without a tunic, and the other without a
book: here is another half naked: Bread I have not, he says, and I
abide by reason.- And I do not get the means of living out of my learning,
and I abide by my reason. 

Love the art, poor as it may be, which thou hast learned, and be content
with it; and pass through the rest of life like one who has intrusted
to the gods with his whole soul all that he has, making thyself neither
the tyrant nor the slave of any man. 

Consider, for example, the times of Vespasian. Thou wilt see all these
things, people marrying, bringing up children, sick, dying, warring,
feasting, trafficking, cultivating the ground, flattering, obstinately
arrogant, suspecting, plotting, wishing for some to die, grumbling
about the present, loving, heaping up treasure, desiring counsulship,
kingly power. Well then, that life of these people no longer exists
at all. Again, remove to the times of Trajan. Again, all is the same.
Their life too is gone. In like manner view also the other epochs
of time and of whole nations, and see how many after great efforts
soon fell and were resolved into the elements. But chiefly thou shouldst
think of those whom thou hast thyself known distracting themselves
about idle things, neglecting to do what was in accordance with their
proper constitution, and to hold firmly to this and to be content
with it. And herein it is necessary to remember that the attention
given to everything has its proper value and proportion. For thus
thou wilt not be dissatisfied, if thou appliest thyself to smaller
matters no further than is fit. 

The words which were formerly familiar are now antiquated: so also
the names of those who were famed of old, are now in a manner antiquated,
Camillus, Caeso, Volesus, Leonnatus, and a little after also Scipio
and Cato, then Augustus, then also Hadrian and Antoninus. For all
things soon pass away and become a mere tale, and complete oblivion
soon buries them. And I say this of those who have shone in a wondrous
way. For the rest, as soon as they have breathed out their breath,
they are gone, and no man speaks of them. And, to conclude the matter,
what is even an eternal remembrance? A mere nothing. What then is
that about which we ought to employ our serious pains? This one thing,
thoughts just, and acts social, and words which never lie, and a disposition
which gladly accepts all that happens, as necessary, as usual, as
flowing from a principle and source of the same kind. 

Willingly give thyself up to Clotho, one of the Fates, allowing her
to spin thy thread into whatever things she pleases. 

Everything is only for a day, both that which remembers and that which
is remembered. 

Observe constantly that all things take place by change, and accustom
thyself to consider that the nature of the Universe loves nothing
so much as to change the things which are and to make new things like
them. For everything that exists is in a manner the seed of that which
will be. But thou art thinking only of seeds which are cast into the
earth or into a womb: but this is a very vulgar notion. 

Thou wilt soon die, and thou art not yet simple, not free from perturbations,
nor without suspicion of being hurt by external things, nor kindly
disposed towards all; nor dost thou yet place wisdom only in acting
justly. 

Examine men's ruling principles, even those of the wise, what kind
of things they avoid, and what kind they pursue. 

What is evil to thee does not subsist in the ruling principle of another;
nor yet in any turning and mutation of thy corporeal covering. Where
is it then? It is in that part of thee in which subsists the power
of forming opinions about evils. Let this power then not form such
opinions, and all is well. And if that which is nearest to it, the
poor body, is burnt, filled with matter and rottenness, nevertheless
let the part which forms opinions about these things be quiet, that
is, let it judge that nothing is either bad or good which can happen
equally to the bad man and the good. For that which happens equally
to him who lives contrary to nature and to him who lives according
to nature, is neither according to nature nor contrary to nature.

Constantly regard the universe as one living being, having one substance
and one soul; and observe how all things have reference to one perception,
the perception of this one living being; and how all things act with
one movement; and how all things are the cooperating causes of all
things which exist; observe too the continuous spinning of the thread
and the contexture of the web. 

Thou art a little soul bearing about a corpse, as Epictetus used to
say. 

It is no evil for things to undergo change, and no good for things
to subsist in consequence of change. 

Time is like a river made up of the events which happen, and a violent
stream; for as soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried away,
and another comes in its place, and this will be carried away too.

Everything which happens is as familiar and well known as the rose
in spring and the fruit in summer; for such is disease, and death,
and calumny, and treachery, and whatever else delights fools or vexes
them. 

In the series of things those which follow are always aptly fitted
to those which have gone before; for this series is not like a mere
enumeration of disjointed things, which has only a necessary sequence,
but it is a rational connection: and as all existing things are arranged
together harmoniously, so the things which come into existence exhibit
no mere succession, but a certain wonderful relationship.

Always remember the saying of Heraclitus, that the death of earth
is to become water, and the death of water is to become air, and the
death of air is to become fire, and reversely. And think too of him
who forgets whither the way leads, and that men quarrel with that
with which they are most constantly in communion, the reason which
governs the universe; and the things which daily meet with seem to
them strange: and consider that we ought not to act and speak as if
we were asleep, for even in sleep we seem to act and speak; and that
we ought not, like children who learn from their parents, simply to
act and speak as we have been taught. 

If any god told thee that thou shalt die to-morrow, or certainly on
the day after to-morrow, thou wouldst not care much whether it was
on the third day or on the morrow, unless thou wast in the highest
degree mean-spirited- for how small is the difference?- So think it
no great thing to die after as many years as thou canst name rather
than to-morrow. 

Think continually how many physicians are dead after often contracting
their eyebrows over the sick; and how many astrologers after predicting
with great pretensions the deaths of others; and how many philosophers
after endless discourses on death or immortality; how many heroes
after killing thousands; and how many tyrants who have used their
power over men's lives with terrible insolence as if they were immortal;
and how many cities are entirely dead, so to speak, Helice and Pompeii
and Herculaneum, and others innumerable. Add to the reckoning all
whom thou hast known, one after another. One man after burying another
has been laid out dead, and another buries him: and all this in a
short time. To conclude, always observe how ephemeral and worthless
human things are, and what was yesterday a little mucus to-morrow
will be a mummy or ashes. Pass then through this little space of time
conformably to nature, and end thy journey in content, just as an
olive falls off when it is ripe, blessing nature who produced it,
and thanking the tree on which it grew. 

Be like the promontory against which the waves continually break,
but it stands firm and tames the fury of the water around it.

Unhappy am I because this has happened to me.- Not so, but happy am
I, though this has happened to me, because I continue free from pain,
neither crushed by the present nor fearing the future. For such a
thing as this might have happened to every man; but every man would
not have continued free from pain on such an occasion. Why then is
that rather a misfortune than this a good fortune? And dost thou in
all cases call that a man's misfortune, which is not a deviation from
man's nature? And does a thing seem to thee to be a deviation from
man's nature, when it is not contrary to the will of man's nature?
Well, thou knowest the will of nature. Will then this which has happened
prevent thee from being just, magnanimous, temperate, prudent, secure
against inconsiderate opinions and falsehood; will it prevent thee
from having modesty, freedom, and everything else, by the presence
of which man's nature obtains all that is its own? Remember too on
every occasion which leads thee to vexation to apply this principle:
not that this is a misfortune, but that to bear it nobly is good fortune.

It is a vulgar, but still a useful help towards contempt of death,
to pass in review those who have tenaciously stuck to life. What more
then have they gained than those who have died early? Certainly they
lie in their tombs somewhere at last, Cadicianus, Fabius, Julianus,
Lepidus, or any one else like them, who have carried out many to be
buried, and then were carried out themselves. Altogether the interval
is small between birth and death; and consider with how much trouble,
and in company with what sort of people and in what a feeble body
this interval is laboriously passed. Do not then consider life a thing
of any value. For look to the immensity of time behind thee, and to
the time which is before thee, another boundless space. In this infinity
then what is the difference between him who lives three days and him
who lives three generations? 

Always run to the short way; and the short way is the natural: accordingly
say and do everything in conformity with the soundest reason. For
such a purpose frees a man from trouble, and warfare, and all artifice
and ostentatious display. 

In he morning when thou risest unwillingly, let this thought be present-
I am rising to the work of a human being. Why then am I dissatisfied
if I am going to do the things for which I exist and for which I was
brought into the world? Or have I been made for this, to lie in the
bed-clothes and keep myself warm?- But this is more pleasant.- Dost
thou exist then to take thy pleasure, and not at all for action or
exertion? Dost thou not see the little plants, the little birds, the
ants, the spiders, the bees working together to put in order their
several parts of the universe? And art thou unwilling to do the work
of a human being, and dost thou not make haste to do that which is
according to thy nature?- But it is necessary to take rest also.-
It is necessary: however nature has fixed bounds to this too: she
has fixed bounds both to eating and drinking, and yet thou goest beyond
these bounds, beyond what is sufficient; yet in thy acts it is not
so, but thou stoppest short of what thou canst do. So thou lovest
not thyself, for if thou didst, thou wouldst love thy nature and her
will. But those who love their several arts exhaust themselves in
working at them unwashed and without food; but thou valuest thy own
own nature less than the turner values the turning art, or the dancer
the dancing art, or the lover of money values his money, or the vainglorious
man his little glory. And such men, when they have a violent affection
to a thing, choose neither to eat nor to sleep rather than to perfect
the things which they care for. But are the acts which concern society
more vile in thy eyes and less worthy of thy labour? 

How easy it is to repel and to wipe away every impression which is
troublesome or unsuitable, and immediately to be in all tranquility.

Judge every word and deed which are according to nature to be fit
for thee; and be not diverted by the blame which follows from any
people nor by their words, but if a thing is good to be done or said,
do not consider it unworthy of thee. For those persons have their
peculiar leading principle and follow their peculiar movement; which
things do not thou regard, but go straight on, following thy own nature
and the common nature; and the way of both is one. 

I go through the things which happen according to nature until I shall
fall and rest, breathing out my breath into that element out of which
I daily draw it in, and falling upon that earth out of which my father
collected the seed, and my mother the blood, and my nurse the milk;
out of which during so many years I have been supplied with food and
drink; which bears me when I tread on it and abuse it for so many
purposes. 

Thou sayest, Men cannot admire the sharpness of thy wits.- Be it so:
but there are many other things of which thou canst not say, I am
not formed for them by nature. Show those qualities then which are
altogether in thy power, sincerity, gravity, endurance of labour,
aversion to pleasure, contentment with thy portion and with few things,
benevolence, frankness, no love of superfluity, freedom from trifling
magnanimity. Dost thou not see how many qualities thou art immediately
able to exhibit, in which there is no excuse of natural incapacity
and unfitness, and yet thou still remainest voluntarily below the
mark? Or art thou compelled through being defectively furnished by
nature to murmur, and to be stingy, and to flatter, and to find fault
with thy poor body, and to try to please men, and to make great display,
and to be so restless in thy mind? No, by the gods: but thou mightest
have been delivered from these things long ago. Only if in truth thou
canst be charged with being rather slow and dull of comprehension,
thou must exert thyself about this also, not neglecting it nor yet
taking pleasure in thy dulness. 

One man, when he has done a service to another, is ready to set it
down to his account as a favour conferred. Another is not ready to
do this, but still in his own mind he thinks of the man as his debtor,
and he knows what he has done. A third in a manner does not even know
what he has done, but he is like a vine which has produced grapes,
and seeks for nothing more after it has once produced its proper fruit.
As a horse when he has run, a dog when he has tracked the game, a
bee when it has made the honey, so a man when he has done a good act,
does not call out for others to come and see, but he goes on to another
act, as a vine goes on to produce again the grapes in season.- Must
a man then be one of these, who in a manner act thus without observing
it?- Yes.- But this very thing is necessary, the observation of what
a man is doing: for, it may be said, it is characteristic of the social
animal to perceive that he is working in a social manner, and indeed
to wish that his social partner also should perceive it.- It is true
what thou sayest, but thou dost not rightly understand what is now
said: and for this reason thou wilt become one of those of whom I
spoke before, for even they are misled by a certain show of reason.
But if thou wilt choose to understand the meaning of what is said,
do not fear that for this reason thou wilt omit any social act.

A prayer of the Athenians: Rain, rain, O dear Zeus, down on the ploughed
fields of the Athenians and on the plains.- In truth we ought not
to pray at all, or we ought to pray in this simple and noble fashion.

Just as we must understand when it is said, That Aesculapius prescribed
to this man horse-exercise, or bathing in cold water or going without
shoes; so we must understand it when it is said, That the nature of
the universe prescribed to this man disease or mutilation or loss
or anything else of the kind. For in the first case Prescribed means
something like this: he prescribed this for this man as a thing adapted
to procure health; and in the second case it means: That which happens
to (or, suits) every man is fixed in a manner for him suitably to
his destiny. For this is what we mean when we say that things are
suitable to us, as the workmen say of squared stones in walls or the
pyramids, that they are suitable, when they fit them to one another
in some kind of connexion. For there is altogether one fitness, harmony.
And as the universe is made up out of all bodies to be such a body
as it is, so out of all existing causes necessity (destiny) is made
up to be such a cause as it is. And even those who are completely
ignorant understand what I mean, for they say, It (necessity, destiny)
brought this to such a person.- This then was brought and this was
precribed to him. Let us then receive these things, as well as those
which Aesculapius prescribes. Many as a matter of course even among
his prescriptions are disagreeable, but we accept them in the hope
of health. Let the perfecting and accomplishment of the things, which
the common nature judges to be good, be judged by thee to be of the
same kind as thy health. And so accept everything which happens, even
if it seem disagreeable, because it leads to this, to the health of
the universe and to the prosperity and felicity of Zeus (the universe).
For he would not have brought on any man what he has brought, if it
were not useful for the whole. Neither does the nature of anything,
whatever it may be, cause anything which is not suitable to that which
is directed by it. For two reasons then it is right to be content
with that which happens to thee; the one, because it was done for
thee and prescribed for thee, and in a manner had reference to thee,
originally from the most ancient causes spun with thy destiny; and
the other, because even that which comes severally to every man is
to the power which administers the universe a cause of felicity and
perfection, nay even of its very continuance. For the integrity of
the whole is mutilated, if thou cuttest off anything whatever from
the conjunction and the continuity either of the parts or of the causes.
And thou dost cut off, as far as it is in thy power, when thou art
dissatisfied, and in a manner triest to put anything out of the way.

Be not disgusted, nor discouraged, nor dissatisfied, if thou dost
not succeed in doing everything according to right principles; but
when thou bast failed, return back again, and be content if the greater
part of what thou doest is consistent with man's nature, and love
this to which thou returnest; and do not return to philosophy as if
she were a master, but act like those who have sore eyes and apply
a bit of sponge and egg, or as another applies a plaster, or drenching
with water. For thus thou wilt not fail to obey reason, and thou wilt
repose in it. And remember that philosophy requires only the things
which thy nature requires; but thou wouldst have something else which
is not according to nature.- It may be objected, Why what is more
agreeable than this which I am doing?- But is not this the very reason
why pleasure deceives us? And consider if magnanimity, freedom, simplicity,
equanimity, piety, are not more agreeable. For what is more agreeable
than wisdom itself, when thou thinkest of the security and the happy
course of all things which depend on the faculty of understanding
and knowledge? 

Things are in such a kind of envelopment that they have seemed to
philosophers, not a few nor those common philosophers, altogether
unintelligible; nay even to the Stoics themselves they seem difficult
to understand. And all our assent is changeable; for where is the
man who never changes? Carry thy thoughts then to the objects themselves,
and consider how short-lived they are and worthless, and that they
may be in the possession of a filthy wretch or a whore or a robber.
Then turn to the morals of those who live with thee, and it is hardly
possible to endure even the most agreeable of them, to say nothing
of a man being hardly able to endure himself. In such darkness then
and dirt and in so constant a flux both of substance and of time,
and of motion and of things moved, what there is worth being highly
prized or even an object of serious pursuit, I cannot imagine. But
on the contrary it is a man's duty to comfort himself, and to wait
for the 

natural dissolution and not to be vexed at the delay, but to rest
in these principles only: the one, that nothing will happen to me
which is not conformable to the nature of the universe; and the other,
that it is in my power never to act contrary to my god and daemon:
for there is no man who will compel me to this. 

About what am I now employing my own soul? On every occasion I must
ask myself this question, and inquire, what have I now in this part
of me which they call the ruling principle? And whose soul have I
now? That of a child, or of a young man, or of a feeble woman, or
of a tyrant, or of a domestic animal, or of a wild beast?

What kind of things those are which appear good to the many, we may
learn even from this. For if any man should conceive certain things
as being really good, such as prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude,
he would not after having first conceived these endure to listen to
anything which should not be in harmony with what is really good.
But if a man has first conceived as good the things which appear to
the many to be good, he will listen and readily receive as very applicable
that which was said by the comic writer. Thus even the many perceive
the difference. For were it not so, this saying would not offend and
would not be rejected in the first case, while we receive it when
it is said of wealth, and of the means which further luxury and fame,
as said fitly and wittily. Go on then and ask if we should value and
think those things to be good, to which after their first conception
in the mind the words of the comic writer might be aptly applied-
that he who has them, through pure abundance has not a place to ease
himself in. 

I am composed of the formal and the material; and neither of them
will perish into non-existence, as neither of them came into existence
out of non-existence. Every part of me then will be reduced by change
into some part of the universe, and that again will change into another
part of the universe, and so on for ever. And by consequence of such
a change I too exist, and those who begot me, and so on for ever in
the other direction. For nothing hinders us from saying so, even if
the universe is administered according to definite periods of revolution.

Reason and the reasoning art (philosophy) are powers which are sufficient
for themselves and for their own works. They move then from a first
principle which is their own, and they make their way to the end which
is proposed to them; and this is the reason why such acts are named
catorthoseis or right acts, which word signifies that they proceed
by the right road. 

None of these things ought to be called a man's, which do not belong
to a man, as man. They are not required of a man, nor does man's nature
promise them, nor are they the means of man's nature attaining its
end. Neither then does the end of man lie in these things, nor yet
that which aids to the accomplishment of this end, and that which
aids towards this end is that which is good. Besides, if any of these
things did belong to man, it would not be right for a man to despise
them and to set himself against them; nor would a man be worthy of
praise who showed that he did not want these things, nor would he
who stinted himself in any of them be good, if indeed these things
were good. But now the more of these things a man deprives himself
of, or of other things like them, or even when he is deprived of any
of them, the more patiently he endures the loss, just in the same
degree he is a better man. 

Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such also will be the character
of thy mind; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts. Dye it then with
a continuous series of such thoughts as these: for instance, that
where a man can live, there he can also live well. But he must live
in a palace;- well then, he can also live well in a palace. And again,
consider that for whatever purpose each thing has been constituted,
for this it has been constituted, and towards this it is carried;
and its end is in that towards which it is carried; and where the
end is, there also is the advantage and the good of each thing. Now
the good for the reasonable animal is society; for that we are made
for society has been shown above. Is it not plain that the inferior
exist for the sake of the superior? But the things which have life
are superior to those which have not life, and of those which have
life the superior are those which have reason. 

To seek what is impossible is madness: and it is impossible that the
bad should not do something of this kind. 

Nothing happens to any man which he is not formed by nature to bear.
The same things happen to another, and either because he does not
see that they have happened or because he would show a great spirit
he is firm and remains unharmed. It is a shame then that ignorance
and conceit should be stronger than wisdom. 

Things themselves touch not the soul, not in the least degree; nor
have they admission to the soul, nor can they turn or move the soul:
but the soul turns and moves itself alone, and whatever judgements
it may think proper to make, such it makes for itself the things which
present themselves to it. 

In one respect man is the nearest thing to me, so far as I must do
good to men and endure them. But so far as some men make themselves
obstacles to my proper acts, man becomes to me one of the things which
are indifferent, no less than the sun or wind or a wild beast. Now
it is true that these may impede my action, but they are no impediments
to my affects and disposition, which have the power of acting conditionally
and changing: for the mind converts and changes every hindrance to
its activity into an aid; and so that which is a hindrance is made
a furtherance to an act; and that which is an obstacle on the road
helps us on this road. 

Reverence that which is best in the universe; and this is that which
makes use of all things and directs all things. And in like manner
also reverence that which is best in thyself; and this is of the same
kind as that. For in thyself also, that which makes use of everything
else, is this, and thy life is directed by this. 

That which does no harm to the state, does no harm to the citizen.
In the case of every appearance of harm apply this rule: if the state
is not harmed by this, neither am I harmed. But if the state is harmed,
thou must not be angry with him who does harm to the state. Show him
where his error is. 

Often think of the rapidity with which things pass by and disappear,
both the things which are and the things which are produced. For substance
is like a river in a continual flow, and the activities of things
are in constant change, and the causes work in infinite varieties;
and there is hardly anything which stands still. And consider this
which is near to thee, this boundless abyss of the past and of the
future in which all things disappear. How then is he not a fool who
is puffed up with such things or plagued about them and makes himself
miserable? for they vex him only for a time, and a short time.

Think of the universal substance, of which thou hast a very small
portion; and of universal time, of which a short and indivisible interval
has been assigned to thee; and of that which is fixed by destiny,
and how small a part of it thou art. 

Does another do me wrong? Let him look to it. He has his own disposition,
his own activity. I now have what the universal nature wills me to
have; and I do what my nature now wills me to do. 

Let the part of thy soul which leads and governs be undisturbed by
the movements in the flesh, whether of pleasure or of pain; and let
it not unite with them, but let it circumscribe itself and limit those
affects to their parts. But when these affects rise up to the mind
by virtue of that other sympathy that naturally exists in a body which
is all one, then thou must not strive to resist the sensation, for
it is natural: but let not the ruling part of itself add to the sensation
the opinion that it is either good or bad. 

Live with the gods. And he does live with the gods who constantly
shows to them, his own soul is satisfied with that which is assigned
to him, and that it does all that the daemon wishes, which Zeus hath
given to every man for his guardian and guide, a portion of himself.
And this is every man's understanding and reason. 

Art thou angry with him whose armpits stink? Art thou angry with him
whose mouth smells foul? What good will this danger do thee? He has
such a mouth, he has such arm-pits: it is necessary that such an emanation
must come from such things- but the man has reason, it will be said,
and he is able, if he takes pain, to discover wherein he offends-
I wish thee well of thy discovery. Well then, and thou hast reason:
by thy rational faculty stir up his rational faculty; show him his
error, admonish him. For if he listens, thou wilt cure him, and there
is no need of anger. Neither tragic actor nor whore... 

As thou intendest to live when thou art gone out,...so it is in thy
power to live here. But if men do not permit thee, then get away out
of life, yet so as if thou wert suffering no harm. The house is smoky,
and I quit it. Why dost thou think that this is any trouble? But so
long as nothing of the kind drives me out, I remain, am free, and
no man shall hinder me from doing what I choose; and I choose to do
what is according to the nature of the rational and social animal.

The intelligence of the universe is social. Accordingly it has made
the inferior things for the sake of the superior, and it has fitted
the superior to one another. Thou seest how it has subordinated, co-ordinated
and assigned to everything its proper portion, and has brought together
into concord with one another the things which are the best.

How hast thou behaved hitherto to the gods, thy parents, brethren,
children, teachers, to those who looked after thy infancy, to thy
friends, kinsfolk, to thy slaves? Consider if thou hast hitherto behaved
to all in such a way that this may be said of thee: 

Never has wronged a man in deed or word. And call to recollection
both how many things thou hast passed through, and how many things
thou hast been able to endure: and that the history of thy life is
now complete and thy service is ended: and how many beautiful things
thou hast seen: and how many pleasures and pains thou hast despised;
and how many things called honourable thou hast spurned; and to how
many ill-minded folks thou hast shown a kind disposition.

Why do unskilled and ignorant souls disturb him who has skill and
knowledge? What soul then has skill and knowledge? That which knows
beginning and end, and knows the reason which pervades all substance
and through all time by fixed periods (revolutions) administers the
universe. 

Soon, very soon, thou wilt be ashes, or a skeleton, and either a name
or not even a name; but name is sound and echo. And the things which
are much valued in life are empty and rotten and trifling, and like
little dogs biting one another, and little children quarrelling, laughing,
and then straightway weeping. But fidelity and modesty and justice
and truth are fled 

Up to Olympus from the wide-spread earth. What then is there which
still detains thee here? If the objects of sense are easily changed
and never stand still, and the organs of perception are dull and easily
receive false impressions; and the poor soul itself is an exhalation
from blood. But to have good repute amidst such a world as this is
an empty thing. Why then dost thou not wait in tranquility for thy
end, whether it is extinction or removal to another state? And until
that time comes, what is sufficient? Why, what else than to venerate
the gods and bless them, and to do good to men, and to practise tolerance
and self-restraint; but as to everything which is beyond the limits
of the poor flesh and breath, to remember that this is neither thine
nor in thy power. 

Thou canst pass thy life in an equable flow of happiness, if thou
canst go by the right way, and think and act in the right way. These
two things are common both to the soul of God and to the soul of man,
and to the soul of every rational being, not to be hindered by another;
and to hold good to consist in the disposition to justice and the
practice of it, and in this to let thy desire find its termination.

If this is neither my own badness, nor an effect of my own badness,
and the common weal is not injured, why am I troubled about it? And
what is the harm to the common weal? 

Do not be carried along inconsiderately by the appearance of things,
but give help to all according to thy ability and their fitness; and
if they should have sustained loss in matters which are indifferent,
do not imagine this to be a damage. For it is a bad habit. But as
the old man, when he went away, asked back his foster-child's top,
remembering that it was a top, so do thou in this case also.

When thou art calling out on the Rostra, hast thou forgotten, man,
what these things are?- Yes; but they are objects of great concern
to these people- wilt thou too then be made a fool for these things?-
I was once a fortunate man, but I lost it, I know not how.- But fortunate
means that a man has assigned to himself a good fortune: and a good
fortune is good disposition of the soul, good emotions, good actions.

The substance of the universe is obedient and compliant; and the
reason which governs it has in itself no cause for doing evil, for
it has no malice, nor does it do evil to anything, nor is anything
harmed by it. But all things are made and perfected according to this
reason. 

Let it make no difference to thee whether thou art cold or warm, if
thou art doing thy duty; and whether thou art drowsy or satisfied
with sleep; and whether ill-spoken of or praised; and whether dying
or doing something else. For it is one of the acts of life, this act
by which we die: it is sufficient then in this act also to do well
what we have in hand. 

Look within. Let neither the peculiar quality of anything nor its
value escape thee. 

All existing things soon change, and they will either be reduced to
vapour, if indeed all substance is one, or they will be dispersed.

The reason which governs knows what its own disposition is, and what
it does, and on what material it works. 

The best way of avenging thyself is not to become like the wrong doer.

Take pleasure in one thing and rest in it, in passing from one social
act to another social act, thinking of God. 

The ruling principle is that which rouses and turns itself, and while
it makes itself such as it is and such as it wills to be, it also
makes everything which happens appear to itself to be such as it wills.

In conformity to the nature of the universe every single thing is
accomplished, for certainly it is not in conformity to any other nature
that each thing is accomplished, either a nature which externally
comprehends this, or a nature which is comprehended within this nature,
or a nature external and independent of this. 

The universe is either a confusion, and a mutual involution of things,
and a dispersion; or it is unity and order and providence. If then
it is the former, why do I desire to tarry in a fortuitous combination
of things and such a disorder? And why do I care about anything else
than how I shall at last become earth? And why am I disturbed, for
the dispersion of my elements will happen whatever I do. But if the
other supposition is true, I venerate, and I am firm, and I trust
in him who governs. 

When thou hast been compelled by circumstances to be disturbed in
a manner, quickly return to thyself and do not continue out of tune
longer than the compulsion lasts; for thou wilt have more mastery
over the harmony by continually recurring to it. 

If thou hadst a step-mother and a mother at the same time, thou wouldst
be dutiful to thy step-mother, but still thou wouldst constantly return
to thy mother. Let the court and philosophy now be to thee step-mother
and mother: return to philosophy frequently and repose in her, through
whom what thou meetest with in the court appears to thee tolerable,
and thou appearest tolerable in the court. 

When we have meat before us and such eatables we receive the impression,
that this is the dead body of a fish, and this is the dead body of
a bird or of a pig; and again, that this Falernian is only a little
grape juice, and this purple robe some sheep's wool dyed with the
blood of a shell-fish: such then are these impressions, and they reach
the things themselves and penetrate them, and so we see what kind
of things they are. Just in the same way ought we to act all through
life, and where there are things which appear most worthy of our approbation,
we ought to lay them bare and look at their worthlessness and strip
them of all the words by which they are exalted. For outward show
is a wonderful perverter of the reason, and when thou art most sure
that thou art employed about things worth thy pains, it is then that
it cheats thee most. Consider then what Crates says of Xenocrates
himself. 

Most of the things which the multitude admire are referred to objects
of the most general kind, those which are held together by cohesion
or natural organization, such as stones, wood, fig-trees, vines, olives.
But those which are admired by men who are a little more reasonable
are referred to the things which are held together by a living principle,
as flocks, herds. Those which are admired by men who are still more
instructed are the things which are held together by a rational soul,
not however a universal soul, but rational so far as it is a soul
skilled in some art, or expert in some other way, or simply rational
so far as it possesses a number of slaves. But he who values rational
soul, a soul universal and fitted for political life, regards nothing
else except this; and above all things he keeps his soul in a condition
and in an activity conformable to reason and social life, and he co-operates
to this end with those who are of the same kind as himself.

Some things are hurrying into existence, and others are hurrying out
of it; and of that which is coming into existence part is already
extinguished. Motions and changes are continually renewing the world,
just as the uninterrupted course of time is always renewing the infinite
duration of ages. In this flowing stream then, on which there is no
abiding, what is there of the things which hurry by on which a man
would set a high price? It would be just as if a man should fall in
love with one of the sparrows which fly by, but it has already passed
out of sight. Something of this kind is the very life of every man,
like the exhalation of the blood and the respiration of the air. For
such as it is to have once drawn in the air and to have given it back,
which we do every moment, just the same is it with the whole respiratory
power, which thou didst receive at thy birth yesterday and the day
before, to give it back to the element from which thou didst first
draw it. 

Neither is transpiration, as in plants, a thing to be valued, nor
respiration, as in domesticated animals and wild beasts, nor the receiving
of impressions by the appearances of things, nor being moved by desires
as puppets by strings, nor assembling in herds, nor being nourished
by food; for this is just like the act of separating and parting with
the useless part of our food. What then is worth being valued? To
be received with clapping of hands? No. Neither must we value the
clapping of tongues, for the praise which comes from the many is a
clapping of tongues. Suppose then that thou hast given up this worthless
thing called fame, what remains that is worth valuing? This in my
opinion, to move thyself and to restrain thyself in conformity to
thy proper constitution, to which end both all employments and arts
lead. For every art aims at this, that the thing which has been made
should be adapted to the work for which it has been made; and both
the vine-planter who looks after the vine, and the horse-breaker,
and he who trains the dog, seek this end. But the education and the
teaching of youth aim at something. In this then is the value of the
education and the teaching. And if this is well, thou wilt not seek
anything else. Wilt thou not cease to value many other things too?
Then thou wilt be neither free, nor sufficient for thy own happiness,
nor without passion. For of necessity thou must be envious, jealous,
and suspicious of those who can take away those things, and plot against
those who have that which is valued by thee. Of necessity a man must
be altogether in a state of perturbation who wants any of these things;
and besides, he must often find fault with the gods. But to reverence
and honour thy own mind will make thee content with thyself, and in
harmony with society, and in agreement with the gods, that is, praising
all that they give and have ordered. 

Above, below, all around are the movements of the elements. But the
motion of virtue is in none of these: it is something more divine,
and advancing by a way hardly observed it goes happily on its road.

How strangely men act. They will not praise those who are living at
the same time and living with themselves; but to be themselves praised
by posterity, by those whom they have never seen or ever will see,
this they set much value on. But this is very much the same as if
thou shouldst be grieved because those who have lived before thee
did not praise thee. 

If a thing is difficult to be accomplished by thyself, do not think
that it is impossible for man: but if anything is possible for man
and conformable to his nature, think that this can be attained by
thyself too. 

In the gymnastic exercises suppose that a man has torn thee with his
nails, and by dashing against thy head has inflicted a wound. Well,
we neither show any signs of vexation, nor are we offended, nor do
we suspect him afterwards as a treacherous fellow; and yet we are
on our guard against him, not however as an enemy, nor yet with suspicion,
but we quietly get out of his way. Something like this let thy behaviour
be in all the other parts of life; let us overlook many things in
those who are like antagonists in the gymnasium. For it is in our
power, as I said, to get out of the way, and to have no suspicion
nor hatred. 

If any man is able to convince me and show me that I do not think
or act right, I will gladly change; for I seek the truth by which
no man was ever injured. But he is injured who abides in his error
and ignorance. 

I do my duty: other things trouble me not; for they are either things
without life, or things without reason, or things that have rambled
and know not the way. 

As to the animals which have no reason and generally all things and
objects, do thou, since thou hast reason and they have none, make
use of them with a generous and liberal spirit. But towards human
beings, as they have reason, behave in a social spirit. And on all
occasions call on the gods, and do not perplex thyself about the length
of time in which thou shalt do this; for even three hours so spent
are sufficient. 

Alexander the Macedonian and his groom by death were brought to the
same state; for either they were received among the same seminal principles
of the universe, or they were alike dispersed among the atoms.

Consider how many things in the same indivisible time take place in
each of us, things which concern the body and things which concern
the soul: and so thou wilt not wonder if many more things, or rather
all things which come into existence in that which is the one and
all, which we call Cosmos, exist in it at the same time.

If any man should propose to thee the question, how the name Antoninus
is written, wouldst thou with a straining of the voice utter each
letter? What then if they grow angry, wilt thou be angry too? Wilt
thou not go on with composure and number every letter? just so then
in this life also remember that every duty is made up of certain parts.
These it is thy duty to observe and without being disturbed or showing
anger towards those who are angry with thee to go on thy way and finish
that which is set before thee. 

How cruel it is not to allow men to strive after the things which
appear to them to be suitable to their nature and profitable! And
yet in a manner thou dost not allow them to do this, when thou art
vexed because they do wrong. For they are certainly moved towards
things because they suppose them to be suitable to their nature and
profitable to them.- But it is not so.- Teach them then, and show
them without being angry. 

Death is a cessation of the impressions through the senses, and of
the pulling of the strings which move the appetites, and of the discursive
movements of the thoughts, and of the service to the flesh.

It is a shame for the soul to be first to give way in this life, when
thy body does not give way. 

Take care that thou art not made into a Caesar, that thou art not
dyed with this dye; for such things happen. Keep thyself then simple,
good, pure, serious, free from affectation, a friend of justice, a
worshipper of the gods, kind, affectionate, strenuous in all proper
acts. Strive to continue to be such as philosophy wished to make thee.
Reverence the gods, and help men. Short is life. There is only one
fruit of this terrene life, a pious disposition and social acts. Do
everything as a disciple of Antoninus. Remember his constancy in every
act which was conformable to reason, and his evenness in all things,
and his piety, and the serenity of his countenance, and his sweetness,
and his disregard of empty fame, and his efforts to understand things;
and how he would never let anything pass without having first most
carefully examined it and clearly understood it; and how he bore with
those who blamed him unjustly without blaming them in return; how
he did nothing in a hurry; and how he listened not to calumnies, and
how exact an examiner of manners and actions he was; and not given
to reproach people, nor timid, nor suspicious, nor a sophist; and
with how little he was satisfied, such as lodging, bed, dress, food,
servants; and how laborious and patient; and how he was able on account
of his sparing diet to hold out to the evening, not even requiring
to relieve himself by any evacuations except at the usual hour; and
his firmness and uniformity in his friendships; and how he tolerated
freedom of speech in those who opposed his opinions; and the pleasure
that he had when any man showed him anything better; and how religious
he was without superstition. Imitate all this that thou mayest have
as good a conscience, when thy last hour comes, as he had.

Return to thy sober senses and call thyself back; and when thou hast
roused thyself from sleep and hast perceived that they were only dreams
which troubled thee, now in thy waking hours look at these (the things
about thee) as thou didst look at those (the dreams). 

I consist of a little body and a soul. Now to this little body all
things are indifferent, for it is not able to perceive differences.
But to the understanding those things only are indifferent, which
are not the works of its own activity. But whatever things are the
works of its own activity, all these are in its power. And of these
however only those which are done with reference to the present; for
as to the future and the past activities of the mind, even these are
for the present indifferent. 

Neither the labour which the hand does nor that of the foot is contrary
to nature, so long as the foot does the foot's work and the hand the
hand's. So then neither to a man as a man is his labour contrary to
nature, so long as it does the things of a man. But if the labour
is not contrary to his nature, neither is it an evil to him.

How many pleasures have been enjoyed by robbers, patricides, tyrants.

Dost thou not see how the handicraftsmen accommodate themselves up
to a certain point to those who are not skilled in their craft- nevertheless
they cling to the reason (the principles) of their art and do not
endure to depart from it? Is it not strange if the architect and the
physician shall have more respect to the reason (the principles) of
their own arts than man to his own reason, which is common to him
and the gods? 

Asia, Europe are corners of the universe: all the sea a drop in the
universe; Athos a little clod of the universe: all the present time
is a point in eternity. All things are little, changeable, perishable.
All things come from thence, from that universal ruling power either
directly proceeding or by way of sequence. And accordingly the lion's
gaping jaws, and that which is poisonous, and every harmful thing,
as a thorn, as mud, are after-products of the grand and beautiful.
Do not then imagine that they are of another kind from that which
thou dost venerate, but form a just opinion of the source of all.

He who has seen present things has seen all, both everything which
has taken place from all eternity and everything which will be for
time without end; for all things are of one kin and of one form.

Frequently consider the connexion of all things in the universe and
their relation to one another. For in a manner all things are implicated
with one another, and all in this way are friendly to one another;
for one thing comes in order after another, and this is by virtue
of the active movement and mutual conspiration and the unity of the
substance. 

Adapt thyself to the things with which thy lot has been cast: and
the men among whom thou hast received thy portion, love them, but
do it truly, sincerely. 

Every instrument, tool, vessel, if it does that for which it has been
made, is well, and yet he who made it is not there. But in the things
which are held together by nature there is within and there abides
in them the power which made them; wherefore the more is it fit to
reverence this power, and to think, that, if thou dost live and act
according to its will, everything in thee is in conformity to intelligence.
And thus also in the universe the things which belong to it are in
conformity to intelligence. 

Whatever of the things which are not within thy power thou shalt suppose
to be good for thee or evil, it must of necessity be that, if such
a bad thing befall thee or the loss of such a good thing, thou wilt
blame the gods, and hate men too, those who are the cause of the misfortune
or the loss, or those who are suspected of being likely to be the
cause; and indeed we do much injustice, because we make a difference
between these things. But if we judge only those things which are
in our power to be good or bad, there remains no reason either for
finding fault with God or standing in a hostile attitude to man.

We are all working together to one end, some with knowledge and design,
and others without knowing what they do; as men also when they are
asleep, of whom it is Heraclitus, I think, who says that they are
labourers and co-operators in the things which take place in the universe.
But men co-operate after different fashions: and even those co-operate
abundantly, who find fault with what happens and those who try to
oppose it and to hinder it; for the universe had need even of such
men as these. It remains then for thee to understand among what kind
of workmen thou placest thyself; for he who rules all things will
certainly make a right use of thee, and he will receive thee among
some part of the co-operators and of those whose labours conduce to
one end. But be not thou such a part as the mean and ridiculous verse
in the play, which Chrysippus speaks of. 

Does the sun undertake to do the work of the rain, or Aesculapius
the work of the Fruit-bearer (the earth)? And how is it with respect
to each of the stars, are they not different and yet they work together
to the same end? 

If the gods have determined about me and about the things which must
happen to me, they have determined well, for it is not easy even to
imagine a deity without forethought; and as to doing me harm, why
should they have any desire towards that? For what advantage would
result to them from this or to the whole, which is the special object
of their providence? But if they have not determined about me individually,
they have certainly determined about the whole at least, and the things
which happen by way of sequence in this general arrangement I ought
to accept with pleasure and to be content with them. But if they determine
about nothing- which it is wicked to believe, or if we do believe
it, let us neither sacrifice nor pray nor swear by them nor do anything
else which we do as if the gods were present and lived with us- but
if however the gods determine about none of the things which concern
us, I am able to determine about myself, and I can inquire about that
which is useful; and that is useful to every man which is conformable
to his own constitution and nature. But my nature is rational and
social; and my city and country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome,
but so far as I am a man, it is the world. The things then which are
useful to these cities are alone useful to me. Whatever happens to
every man, this is for the interest of the universal: this might be
sufficient. But further thou wilt observe this also as a general truth,
if thou dost observe, that whatever is profitable to any man is profitable
also to other men. But let the word profitable be taken here in the
common sense as said of things of the middle kind, neither good nor
bad. 

As it happens to thee in the amphitheatre and such places, that the
continual sight of the same things and the uniformity make the spectacle
wearisome, so it is in the whole of life; for all things above, below,
are the same and from the same. How long then? 

Think continually that all kinds of men and of all kinds of pursuits
and of all nations are dead, so that thy thoughts come down even to
Philistion and Phoebus and Origanion. Now turn thy thoughts to the
other kinds of men. To that place then we must remove, where there
are so many great orators, and so many noble philosophers, Heraclitus,
Pythagoras, Socrates; so many heroes of former days, and so many generals
after them, and tyrants; besides these, Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes,
and other men of acute natural talents, great minds, lovers of labour,
versatile, confident, mockers even of the perishable and ephemeral
life of man, as Menippus and such as are like him. As to all these
consider that they have long been in the dust. What harm then is this
to them; and what to those whose names are altogether unknown? One
thing here is worth a great deal, to pass thy life in truth and justice,
with a benevolent disposition even to liars and unjust men.

When thou wishest to delight thyself, think of the virtues of those
who live with thee; for instance, the activity of one, and the modesty
of another, and the liberality of a third, and some other good quality
of a fourth. For nothing delights so much as the examples of the virtues,
when they are exhibited in the morals of those who live with us and
present themselves in abundance, as far as is possible. Wherefore
we must keep them before us. 

Thou art not dissatisfied, I suppose, because thou weighest only so
many litrae and not three hundred. Be not dissatisfied then that thou
must live only so many years and not more; for as thou art satisfied
with the amount of substance which has been assigned to thee, so be
content with the time. 

Let us try to persuade them (men). But act even against their will,
when the principles of justice lead that way. If however any man by
using force stands in thy way, betake thyself to contentment and tranquility,
and at the same time employ the hindrance towards the exercise of
some other virtue; and remember that thy attempt was with a reservation,
that thou didst not desire to do impossibilities. What then didst
thou desire?- Some such effort as this.- But thou attainest thy object,
if the things to which thou wast moved are accomplished.

He who loves fame considers another man's activity to be his own good;
and he who loves pleasure, his own sensations; but he who has understanding,
considers his own acts to be his own good. 

It is in our power to have no opinion about a thing, and not to be
disturbed in our soul; for things themselves have no natural power
to form our judgements. 

Accustom thyself to attend carefully to what is said by another, and
as much as it is possible, be in the speaker's mind. 

That which is not good for the swarm, neither is it good for the bee.

If sailors abused the helmsman or the sick the doctor, would they
listen to anybody else; or how could the helmsman secure the safety
of those in the ship or the doctor the health of those whom he attends?

How many together with whom I came into the world are already gone
out of it. 

To the jaundiced honey tastes bitter, and to those bitten by mad dogs
water causes fear; and to little children the ball is a fine thing.
Why then am I angry? Dost thou think that a false opinion has less
power than the bile in the jaundiced or the poison in him who is bitten
by a mad dog? 

No man will hinder thee from living according to the reason of thy
own nature: nothing will happen to thee contrary to the reason of
the universal nature. 

What kind of people are those whom men wish to please, and for what
objects, and by what kind of acts? How soon will time cover all things,
and how many it has covered already. 

What is badness? It is that which thou hast often seen. And on the
occasion of everything which happens keep this in mind, that it is
that which thou hast often seen. Everywhere up and down thou wilt
find the same things, with which the old histories are filled, those
of the middle ages and those of our own day; with which cities and
houses are filled now. There is nothing new: all things are both familiar
and short-lived. 

How can our principles become dead, unless the impressions (thoughts)
which correspond to them are extinguished? But it is in thy power
continuously to fan these thoughts into a flame. I can have that opinion
about anything, which I ought to have. If I can, why am I disturbed?
The things which are external to my mind have no relation at all to
my mind.- Let this be the state of thy affects, and thou standest
erect. To recover thy life is in thy power. Look at things again as
thou didst use to look at them; for in this consists the recovery
of thy life. 

The idle business of show, plays on the stage, flocks of sheep, herds,
exercises with spears, a bone cast to little dogs, a bit of bread
into fish-ponds, labourings of ants and burden-carrying, runnings
about of frightened little mice, puppets pulled by strings- all alike.
It is thy duty then in the midst of such things to show good humour
and not a proud air; to understand however that every man is worth
just so much as the things are worth about which he busies himself.

In discourse thou must attend to what is said, and in every movement
thou must observe what is doing. And in the one thou shouldst see
immediately to what end it refers, but in the other watch carefully
what is the thing signified. 

Is my understanding sufficient for this or not? If it is sufficient,
I use it for the work as an instrument given by the universal nature.
But if it is not sufficient, then either I retire from the work and
give way to him who is able to do it better, unless there be some
reason why I ought not to do so; or I do it as well as I can, taking
to help me the man who with the aid of my ruling principle can do
what is now fit and useful for the general good. For whatsoever either
by myself or with another I can do, ought to be directed to this only,
to that which is useful and well suited to society. 

How many after being celebrated by fame have been given up to oblivion;
and how many who have celebrated the fame of others have long been
dead. 

Be not ashamed to be helped; for it is thy business to do thy duty
like a soldier in the assault on a town. How then, if being lame thou
canst not mount up on the battlements alone, but with the help of
another it is possible? 

Let not future things disturb thee, for thou wilt come to them, if
it shall be necessary, having with thee the same reason which now
thou usest for present things. 

All things are implicated with one another, and the bond is holy;
and there is hardly anything unconnected with any other thing. For
things have been co-ordinated, and they combine to form the same universe
(order). For there is one universe made up of all things, and one
God who pervades all things, and one substance, and one law, one common
reason in all intelligent animals, and one truth; if indeed there
is also one perfection for all animals which are of the same stock
and participate in the same reason. 

Everything material soon disappears in the substance of the whole;
and everything formal (causal) is very soon taken back into the universal
reason; and the memory of everything is very soon overwhelmed in time.

To the rational animal the same act is according to nature and according
to reason. 

Be thou erect, or be made erect. 
Just as it is with the members in those bodies which are united in
one, so it is with rational beings which exist separate, for they
have been constituted for one co-operation. And the perception of
this will be more apparent to thee, if thou often sayest to thyself
that I am a member (melos) of the system of rational beings. But if
(using the letter r) thou sayest that thou art a part (meros) thou
dost not yet love men from thy heart; beneficence does not yet delight
thee for its own sake; thou still doest it barely as a thing of propriety,
and not yet as doing good to thyself. 

Let there fall externally what will on the parts which can feel the
effects of this fall. For those parts which have felt will complain,
if they choose. But I, unless I think that what has happened is an
evil, am not injured. And it is in my power not to think so.

Whatever any one does or says, I must be good, just as if the gold,
or the emerald, or the purple were always saying this, Whatever any
one does or says, I must be emerald and keep my colour. 

The ruling faculty does not disturb itself; I mean, does not frighten
itself or cause itself pain. But if any one else can frighten or pain
it, let him do so. For the faculty itself will not by its own opinion
turn itself into such ways. Let the body itself take care, if it can,
that is suffer nothing, and let it speak, if it suffers. But the soul
itself, that which is subject to fear, to pain, which has completely
the power of forming an opinion about these things, will suffer nothing,
for it will never deviate into such a judgement. The leading principle
in itself wants nothing, unless it makes a want for itself; and therefore
it is both free from perturbation and unimpeded, if it does not disturb
and impede itself. 

Eudaemonia (happiness) is a good daemon, or a good thing. What then
art thou doing here, O imagination? Go away, I entreat thee by the
gods, as thou didst come, for I want thee not. But thou art come according
to thy old fashion. I am not angry with thee: only go away.

Is any man afraid of change? Why what can take place without change?
What then is more pleasing or more suitable to the universal nature?
And canst thou take a bath unless the wood undergoes a change? And
canst thou be nourished, unless the food undergoes a change? And can
anything else that is useful be accomplished without change? Dost
thou not see then that for thyself also to change is just the same,
and equally necessary for the universal nature? 

Through the universal substance as through a furious torrent all bodies
are carried, being by their nature united with and cooperating with
the whole, as the parts of our body with one another. How many a Chrysippus,
how many a Socrates, how many an Epictetus has time already swallowed
up? And let the same thought occur to thee with reference to every
man and thing. 

One thing only troubles me, lest I should do something which the constitution
of man does not allow, or in the way which it does not allow, or what
it does not allow now. 

Near is thy forgetfulness of all things; and near the forgetfulness
of thee by all. 

It is peculiar to man to love even those who do wrong. And this happens,
if when they do wrong it occurs to thee that they are kinsmen, and
that they do wrong through ignorance and unintentionally, and that
soon both of you will die; and above all, that the wrong-doer has
done thee no harm, for he has not made thy ruling faculty worse than
it was before. 

The universal nature out of the universal substance, as if it were
wax, now moulds a horse, and when it has broken this up, it uses the
material for a tree, then for a man, then for something else; and
each of these things subsists for a very short time. But it is no
hardship for the vessel to be broken up, just as there was none in
its being fastened together. 

A scowling look is altogether unnatural; when it is often assumed,
the result is that all comeliness dies away, and at last is so completely
extinguished that it cannot be again lighted up at all. Try to conclude
from this very fact that it is contrary to reason. For if even the
perception of doing wrong shall depart, what reason is there for living
any longer? 

Nature which governs the whole will soon change all things which thou
seest, and out of their substance will make other things, and again
other things from the substance of them, in order that the world may
be ever new. 

When a man has done thee any wrong, immediately consider with what
opinion about good or evil he has done wrong. For when thou hast seen
this, thou wilt pity him, and wilt neither wonder nor be angry. For
either thou thyself thinkest the same thing to be good that he does
or another thing of the same kind. It is thy duty then to pardon him.
But if thou dost not think such things to be good or evil, thou wilt
more readily be well disposed to him who is in error. 

Think not so much of what thou hast not as of what thou hast: but
of the things which thou hast select the best, and then reflect how
eagerly they would have been sought, if thou hadst them not. At the
same time however take care that thou dost not through being so pleased
with them accustom thyself to overvalue them, so as to be disturbed
if ever thou shouldst not have them. 

Retire into thyself. The rational principle which rules has this nature,
that it is content with itself when it does what is just, and so secures
tranquility. 

Wipe out the imagination. Stop the pulling of the strings. Confine
thyself to the present. Understand well what happens either to thee
or to another. Divide and distribute every object into the causal
(formal) and the material. Think of thy last hour. Let the wrong which
is done by a man stay there where the wrong was done. 

Direct thy attention to what is said. Let thy understanding enter
into the things that are doing and the things which do them.

Adorn thyself with simplicity and modesty and with indifference towards
the things which lie between virtue and vice. Love mankind. Follow
God. The poet says that Law rules all.- And it is enough to remember
that Law rules all. 

About death: Whether it is a dispersion, or a resolution into atoms,
or annihilation, it is either extinction or change. 

About pain: The pain which is intolerable carries us off; but that
which lasts a long time is tolerable; and the mind maintains its own
tranquility by retiring into itself, and the ruling faculty is not
made worse. But the parts which are harmed by pain, let them, if they
can, give their opinion about it. 

About fame: Look at the minds of those who seek fame, observe what
they are, and what kind of things they avoid, and what kind of things
they pursue. And consider that as the heaps of sand piled on one another
hide the former sands, so in life the events which go before are soon
covered by those which come after. 

From Plato: The man who has an elevated mind and takes a view of all
time and of all substance, dost thou suppose it possible for him to
think that human life is anything great? it is not possible, he said.-
Such a man then will think that death also is no evil.- Certainly
not. 

From Antisthenes: It is royal to do good and to be abused.

It is a base thing for the countenance to be obedient and to regulate
and compose itself as the mind commands, and for the mind not to be
regulated and composed by itself. 

It is not right to vex ourselves at things, 
For they care nought about it. 

To the immortal gods and us give joy. 

Life must be reaped like the ripe ears of corn: 
One man is born; another dies. 

If gods care not for me and for my children, 
There is a reason for it. 

For the good is with me, and the just. 

No joining others in their wailing, no violent emotion. 

From Plato: But I would make this man a sufficient answer, which is
this: Thou sayest not well, if thou thinkest that a man who is good
for anything at all ought to compute the hazard of life or death,
and should not rather look to this only in all that he does, whether
he is doing what is just or unjust, and the works of a good or a bad
man. 

For thus it is, men of Athens, in truth: wherever a man has placed
himself thinking it the best place for him, or has been placed by
a commander, there in my opinion he ought to stay and to abide the
hazard, taking nothing into the reckoning, either death or anything
else, before the baseness of deserting his post. 

But, my good friend, reflect whether that which is noble and good
is not something different from saving and being saved; for as to
a man living such or such a time, at least one who is really a man,
consider if this is not a thing to be dismissed from the thoughts:
and there must be no love of life: but as to these matters a man must
intrust them to the deity and believe what the women say, that no
man can escape his destiny, the next inquiry being how he may best
live the time that he has to live. 

Look round at the courses of the stars, as if thou wert going along
with them; and constantly consider the changes of the elements into
one another; for such thoughts purge away the filth of the terrene
life. 

This is a fine saying of Plato: That he who is discoursing about men
should look also at earthly things as if he viewed them from some
higher place; should look at them in their assemblies, armies, agricultural
labours, marriages, treaties, births, deaths, noise of the courts
of justice, desert places, various nations of barbarians, feasts,
lamentations, markets, a mixture of all things and an orderly combination
of contraries. 

Consider the past; such great changes of political supremacies. Thou
mayest foresee also the things which will be. For they will certainly
be of like form, and it is not possible that they should deviate from
the order of the things which take place now: accordingly to have
contemplated human life for forty years is the same as to have contemplated
it for ten thousand years. For what more wilt thou see? 

That which has grown from the earth to the earth, 
But that which has sprung from heavenly seed, 
Back to the heavenly realms returns. This is either a dissolution
of the mutual involution of the atoms, or a similar dispersion of
the unsentient elements. 

With food and drinks and cunning magic arts 
Turning the channel's course to 'scape from death. 
The breeze which heaven has sent 
We must endure, and toil without complaining. 

Another may be more expert in casting his opponent; but he is not
more social, nor more modest, nor better disciplined to meet all that
happens, nor more considerate with respect to the faults of his neighbours.

Where any work can be done conformably to the reason which is common
to gods and men, there we have nothing to fear: for where we are able
to get profit by means of the activity which is successful and proceeds
according to our constitution, there no harm is to be suspected.

Everywhere and at all times it is in thy power piously to acquiesce
in thy present condition, and to behave justly to those who are about
thee, and to exert thy skill upon thy present thoughts, that nothing
shall steal into them without being well examined. 

Do not look around thee to discover other men's ruling principles,
but look straight to this, to what nature leads thee, both the universal
nature through the things which happen to thee, and thy own nature
through the acts which must be done by thee. But every being ought
to do that which is according to its constitution; and all other things
have been constituted for the sake of rational beings, just as among
irrational things the inferior for the sake of the superior, but the
rational for the sake of one another. 

The prime principle then in man's constitution is the social. And
the second is not to yield to the persuasions of the body, for it
is the peculiar office of the rational and intelligent motion to circumscribe
itself, and never to be overpowered either by the motion of the senses
or of the appetites, for both are animal; but the intelligent motion
claims superiority and does not permit itself to be overpowered by
the others. And with good reason, for it is formed by nature to use
all of them. The third thing in the rational constitution is freedom
from error and from deception. Let then the ruling principle holding
fast to these things go straight on, and it has what is its own.

Consider thyself to be dead, and to have completed thy life up to
the present time; and live according to nature the remainder which
is allowed thee. 

Love that only which happens to thee and is spun with the thread of
thy destiny. For what is more suitable? 

In everything which happens keep before thy eyes those to whom the
same things happened, and how they were vexed, and treated them as
strange things, and found fault with them: and now where are they?
Nowhere. Why then dost thou too choose to act in the same way? And
why dost thou not leave these agitations which are foreign to nature,
to those who cause them and those who are moved by them? And why art
thou not altogether intent upon the right way of making use of the
things which happen to thee? For then thou wilt use them well, and
they will be a material for thee to work on. Only attend to thyself,
and resolve to be a good man in every act which thou doest: and remember...

Look within. Within is the fountain of good, and it will ever bubble
up, if thou wilt ever dig. 

The body ought to be compact, and to show no irregularity either in
motion or attitude. For what the mind shows in the face by maintaining
in it the expression of intelligence and propriety, that ought to
be required also in the whole body. But all of these things should
be observed without affectation. 

The art of life is more like the wrestler's art than the dancer's,
in respect of this, that it should stand ready and firm to meet onsets
which are sudden and unexpected. 

Constantly observe who those are whose approbation thou wishest to
have, and what ruling principles they possess. For then thou wilt
neither blame those who offend involuntarily, nor wilt thou want their
approbation, if thou lookest to the sources of their opinions and
appetites. 

Every soul, the philosopher says, is involuntarily deprived of truth;
consequently in the same way it is deprived of justice and temperance
and benevolence and everything of the kind. It is most necessary to
bear this constantly in mind, for thus thou wilt be more gentle towards
all. 

In every pain let this thought be present, that there is no dishonour
in it, nor does it make the governing intelligence worse, for it does
not damage the intelligence either so far as the intelligence is rational
or so far as it is social. Indeed in the case of most pains let this
remark of Epicurus aid thee, that pain is neither intolerable nor
everlasting, if thou bearest in mind that it has its limits, and if
thou addest nothing to it in imagination: and remember this too, that
we do not perceive that many things which are disagreeable to us are
the same as pain, such as excessive drowsiness, and the being scorched
by heat, and the having no appetite. When then thou art discontented
about any of these things, say to thyself, that thou art yielding
to pain. 

Take care not to feel towards the inhuman, as they feel towards men.

How do we know if Telauges was not superior in character to Socrates?
For it is not enough that Socrates died a more noble death, and disputed
more skilfully with the sophists, and passed the night in the cold
with more endurance, and that when he was bid to arrest Leon of Salamis,
he considered it more noble to refuse, and that he walked in a swaggering
way in the streets- though as to this fact one may have great doubts
if it was true. But we ought to inquire, what kind of a soul it was
that Socrates possessed, and if he was able to be content with being
just towards men and pious towards the gods, neither idly vexed on
account of men's villainy, nor yet making himself a slave to any man's
ignorance, nor receiving as strange anything that fell to his share
out of the universal, nor enduring it as intolerable, nor allowing
his understanding to sympathize with the affects of the miserable
flesh. 

Nature has not so mingled the intelligence with the composition of
the body, as not to have allowed thee the power of circumscribing
thyself and of bringing under subjection to thyself all that is thy
own; for it is very possible to be a divine man and to be recognised
as such by no one. Always bear this in mind; and another thing too,
that very little indeed is necessary for living a happy life. And
because thou hast despaired of becoming a dialectician and skilled
in the knowledge of nature, do not for this reason renounce the hope
of being both free and modest and social and obedient to God.

It is in thy power to live free from all compulsion in the greatest
tranquility of mind, even if all the world cry out against thee as
much as they choose, and even if wild beasts tear in pieces the members
of this kneaded matter which has grown around thee. For what hinders
the mind in the midst of all this from maintaining itself in tranquility
and in a just judgement of all surrounding things and in a ready use
of the objects which are presented to it, so that the judgement may
say to the thing which falls under its observation: This thou art
in substance (reality), though in men's opinion thou mayest appear
to be of a different kind; and the use shall say to that which falls
under the hand: Thou art the thing that I was seeking; for to me that
which presents itself is always a material for virtue both rational
and political, and in a word, for the exercise of art, which belongs
to man or God. For everything which happens has a relationship either
to God or man, and is neither new nor difficult to handle, but usual
and apt matter to work on. 

The perfection of moral character consists in this, in passing every
day as the last, and in being neither violently excited nor torpid
nor playing the hypocrite. 

The gods who are immortal are not vexed because during so long a time
they must tolerate continually men such as they are and so many of
them bad; and besides this, they also take care of them in all ways.
But thou, who art destined to end so soon, art thou wearied of enduring
the bad, and this too when thou art one of them? 

It is a ridiculous thing for a man not to fly from his own badness,
which is indeed possible, but to fly from other men's badness, which
is impossible. 

Whatever the rational and political (social) faculty finds to be neither
intelligent nor social, it properly judges to be inferior to itself.

When thou hast done a good act and another has received it, why dost
thou look for a third thing besides these, as fools do, either to
have the reputation of having done a good act or to obtain a return?

No man is tired of receiving what is useful. But it is useful to act
according to nature. Do not then be tired of receiving what is useful
by doing it to others. 

The nature of the An moved to make the universe. But now either everything
that takes place comes by way of consequence or continuity; or even
the chief things towards which the ruling power of the universe directs
its own movement are governed by no rational principle. If this is
remembered it will make thee more tranquil in many things.

This reflection also tends to the removal of the desire of empty
fame, that it is no longer in thy power to have lived the whole of
thy life, or at least thy life from thy youth upwards, like a philosopher;
but both to many others and to thyself it is plain that thou art far
from philosophy. Thou hast fallen into disorder then, so that it is
no longer easy for thee to get the reputation of a philosopher; and
thy plan of life also opposes it. If then thou hast truly seen where
the matter lies, throw away the thought, How thou shalt seem to others,
and be content if thou shalt live the rest of thy life in such wise
as thy nature wills. Observe then what it wills, and let nothing else
distract thee; for thou hast had experience of many wanderings without
having found happiness anywhere, not in syllogisms, nor in wealth,
nor in reputation, nor in enjoyment, nor anywhere. Where is it then?
In doing what man's nature requires. How then shall a man do this?
If he has principles from which come his affects and his acts. What
principles? Those which relate to good and bad: the belief that there
is nothing good for man, which does not make him just, temperate,
manly, free; and that there is nothing bad, which does not do the
contrary to what has been mentioned. 

On the occasion of every act ask thyself, How is this with respect
to me? Shall I repent of it? A little time and I am dead, and all
is gone. What more do I seek, if what I am now doing is work of an
intelligent living being, and a social being, and one who is under
the same law with God? 

Alexander and Gaius and Pompeius, what are they in comparison with
Diogenes and Heraclitus and Socrates? For they were acquainted with
things, and their causes (forms), and their matter, and the ruling
principles of these men were the same. But as to the others, how many
things had they to care for, and to how many things were they slaves?

Consider that men will do the same things nevertheless, even though
thou shouldst burst. 

This is the chief thing: Be not perturbed, for all things are according
to the nature of the universal; and in a little time thou wilt be
nobody and nowhere, like Hadrian and Augustus. In the next place having
fixed thy eyes steadily on thy business look at it, and at the same
time remembering that it is thy duty to be a good man, and what man's
nature demands, do that without turning aside; and speak as it seems
to thee most just, only let it be with a good disposition and with
modesty and without hypocrisy. 

The nature of the universal has this work to do, to remove to that
place the things which are in this, to change them, to take them away
hence, and to carry them there. All things are change, yet we need
not fear anything new. All things are familiar to us; but the distribution
of them still remains the same. 

Every nature is contented with itself when it goes on its way well;
and a rational nature goes on its way well, when in its thoughts it
assents to nothing false or uncertain, and when it directs its movements
to social acts only, and when it confines its desires and aversions
to the things which are in its power, and when it is satisfied with
everything that is assigned to it by the common nature. For of this
common nature every particular nature is a part, as the nature of
the leaf is a part of the nature of the plant; except that in the
plant the nature of the leaf is part of a nature which has not perception
or reason, and is subject to be impeded; but the nature of man is
part of a nature which is not subject to impediments, and is intelligent
and just, since it gives to everything in equal portions and according
to its worth, times, substance, cause (form), activity, and incident.
But examine, not to discover that any one thing compared with any
other single thing is equal in all respects, but by taking all the
parts together of one thing and comparing them with all the parts
together of another. 

Thou hast not leisure or ability to read. But thou hast leisure or
ability to check arrogance: thou hast leisure to be superior to pleasure
and pain: thou hast leisure to be superior to love of fame, and not
to be vexed at stupid and ungrateful people, nay even to care for
them. 

Let no man any longer hear thee finding fault with the court life
or with thy own. 

Repentance is a kind of self-reproof for having neglected something
useful; but that which is good must be something useful, and the perfect
good man should look after it. But no such man would ever repent of
having refused any sensual pleasure. Pleasure then is neither good
nor useful. 

This thing, what is it in itself, in its own constitution? What is
its substance and material? And what its causal nature (or form)?
And what is it doing in the world? And how long does it subsist?

When thou risest from sleep with reluctance, remember that it is according
to thy constitution and according to human nature to perform social
acts, but sleeping is common also to irrational animals. But that
which is according to each individual's nature is also more peculiarly
its own, and more suitable to its nature, and indeed also more agreeable.

Constantly and, if it be possible, on the occasion of every impression
on the soul, apply to it the principles of Physic, of Ethic, and of
Dialectic. 

Whatever man thou meetest with, immediately say to thyself: What opinions
has this man about good and bad? For if with respect to pleasure and
pain and the causes of each, and with respect to fame and ignominy,
death and life, he has such and such opinions, it will seem nothing
wonderful or strange to me, if he does such and such things; and I
shall bear in mind that he is compelled to do so. 

Remember that as it is a shame to be surprised if the fig-tree produces
figs, so it is to be surprised if the world produces such and such
things of which it is productive; and for the physician and the helmsman
it is a shame to be surprised, if a man has a fever, or if the wind
is unfavourable. 

Remember that to change thy opinion and to follow him who corrects
thy error is as consistent with freedom as it is to persist in thy
error. For it is thy own, the activity which is exerted according
to thy own movement and judgement, and indeed according to thy own
understanding too. 

If a thing is in thy own power, why dost thou do it? But if it is
in the power of another, whom dost thou blame? The atoms (chance)
or the gods? Both are foolish. Thou must blame nobody. For if thou
canst, correct that which is the cause; but if thou canst not do this,
correct at least the thing itself; but if thou canst not do even this,
of what use is it to thee to find fault? For nothing should be done
without a purpose. 

That which has died falls not out of the universe. If it stays here,
it also changes here, and is dissolved into its proper parts, which
are elements of the universe and of thyself. And these too change,
and they murmur not. 

Everything exists for some end, a horse, a vine. Why dost thou wonder?
Even the sun will say, I am for some purpose, and the rest of the
gods will say the same. For what purpose then art thou? to enjoy pleasure?
See if common sense allows this. 

Nature has had regard in everything no less to the end than to the
beginning and the continuance, just like the man who throws up a ball.
What good is it then for the ball to be thrown up, or harm for it
to come down, or even to have fallen? And what good is it to the bubble
while it holds together, or what harm when it is burst? The same may
be said of a light also. 

Turn it (the body) inside out, and see what kind of thing it is; and
when it has grown old, what kind of thing it becomes, and when it
is diseased. 

Short-lived are both the praiser and the praised, and the rememberer
and the remembered: and all this in a nook of this part of the world;
and not even here do all agree, no, not any one with himself: and
the whole earth too is a point. 

Attend to the matter which is before thee, whether it is an opinion
or an act or a word. 

Thou sufferest this justly: for thou choosest rather to become good
to-morrow than to be good to-day. 

Am I doing anything? I do it with reference to the good of mankind.
Does anything happen to me? I receive it and refer it to the gods,
and the source of all things, from which all that happens is derived.

Such as bathing appears to thee- oil, sweat, dirt, filthy water, all
things disgusting- so is every part of life and everything.

Lucilla saw Verus die, and then Lucilla died. Secunda saw Maximus
die, and then Secunda died. Epitynchanus saw Diotimus die, and Epitynchanus
died. Antoninus saw Faustina die, and then Antoninus died. Such is
everything. Celer saw Hadrian die, and then Celer died. And those
sharp-witted men, either seers or men inflated with pride, where are
they? For instance the sharp-witted men, Charax and Demetrius the
Platonist and Eudaemon, and any one else like them. All ephemeral,
dead long ago. Some indeed have not been remembered even for a short
time, and others have become the heroes of fables, and again others
have disappeared even from fables. Remember this then, that this little
compound, thyself, must either be dissolved, or thy poor breath must
be extinguished, or be removed and placed elsewhere. 

It is satisfaction to a man to do the proper works of a man. Now it
is a proper work of a man to be benevolent to his own kind, to despise
the movements of the senses, to form a just judgement of plausible
appearances, and to take a survey of the nature of the universe and
of the things which happen in it. 

There are three relations between thee and other things: the one to
the body which surrounds thee; the second to the divine cause from
which all things come to all; and the third to those who live with
thee. 

Pain is either an evil to the body- then let the body say what it
thinks of it- or to the soul; but it is in the power of the soul to
maintain its own serenity and tranquility, and not to think that pain
is an evil. For every judgement and movement and desire and aversion
is within, and no evil ascends so high. 

Wipe out thy imaginations by often saying to thyself: now it is in
my power to let no badness be in this soul, nor desire nor any perturbation
at all; but looking at all things I see what is their nature, and
I use each according to its value.- Remember this power which thou
hast from nature. 

Speak both in the senate and to every man, whoever he may be, appropriately,
not with any affectation: use plain discourse. 

Augustus' court, wife, daughter, descendants, ancestors, sister, Agrippa,
kinsmen, intimates, friends, Areius, Maecenas, physicians and sacrificing
priests- the whole court is dead. Then turn to the rest, not considering
the death of a single man, but of a whole race, as of the Pompeii;
and that which is inscribed on the tombs- The last of his race. Then
consider what trouble those before them have had that they might leave
a successor; and then, that of necessity some one must be the last.
Again here consider the death of a whole race. 

It is thy duty to order thy life well in every single act; and if
every act does its duty, as far as is possible, be content; and no
one is able to hinder thee so that each act shall not do its duty.-
But something external will stand in the way.- Nothing will stand
in the way of thy acting justly and soberly and considerately.- But
perhaps some other active power will be hindered.- Well, but by acquiescing
in the hindrance and by being content to transfer thy efforts to that
which is allowed, another opportunity of action is immediately put
before thee in place of that which was hindered, and one which will
adapt itself to this ordering of which we are speaking. 

Receive wealth or prosperity without arrogance; and be ready to let
it go. 

If thou didst ever see a hand cut off, or a foot, or a head, lying
anywhere apart from the rest of the body, such does a man make himself,
as far as he can, who is not content with what happens, and separates
himself from others, or does anything unsocial. Suppose that thou
hast detached thyself from the natural unity- for thou wast made by
nature a part, but now thou hast cut thyself off- yet here there is
this beautiful provision, that it is in thy power again to unite thyself.
God has allowed this to no other part, after it has been separated
and cut asunder, to come together again. But consider the kindness
by which he has distinguished man, for he has put it in his power
not to be separated at all from the universal; and when he has been
separated, he has allowed him to return and to be united and to resume
his place as a part. 

As the nature of the universal has given to every rational being all
the other powers that it has, so we have received from it this power
also. For as the universal nature converts and fixes in its predestined
place everything which stands in the way and opposes it, and makes
such things a part of itself, so also the rational animal is able
to make every hindrance its own material, and to use it for such purposes
as it may have designed. 

Do not disturb thyself by thinking of the whole of thy life. Let not
thy thoughts at once embrace all the various troubles which thou mayest
expect to befall thee: but on every occasion ask thyself, What is
there in this which is intolerable and past bearing? For thou wilt
be ashamed to confess. In the next place remember that neither the
future nor the past pains thee, but only the present. But this is
reduced to a very little, if thou only circumscribest it, and chidest
thy mind, if it is unable to hold out against even this.

Does Panthea or Pergamus now sit by the tomb of Verus? Does Chaurias
or Diotimus sit by the tomb of Hadrian? That would be ridiculous.
Well, suppose they did sit there, would the dead be conscious of it?
And if the dead were conscious, would they be pleased? And if they
were pleased, would that make them immortal? Was it not in the order
of destiny that these persons too should first become old women and
old men and then die? What then would those do after these were dead?
All this is foul smell and blood in a bag. 

If thou canst see sharp, look and judge wisely, says the philosopher.

In the constitution of the rational animal I see no virtue which is
opposed to justice; but I see a virtue which is opposed to love of
pleasure, and that is temperance. 

If thou takest away thy opinion about that which appears to give thee
pain, thou thyself standest in perfect security.- Who is this self?-
The reason.- But I am not reason.- Be it so. Let then the reason itself
not trouble itself. But if any other part of thee suffers, let it
have its own opinion about itself. 

Hindrance to the perceptions of sense is an evil to the animal nature.
Hindrance to the movements (desires) is equally an evil to the animal
nature. And something else also is equally an impediment and an evil
to the constitution of plants. So then that which is a hindrance to
the intelligence is an evil to the intelligent nature. Apply all these
things then to thyself. Does pain or sensuous pleasure affect thee?
The senses will look to that.- Has any obstacle opposed thee in thy
efforts towards an object? if indeed thou wast making this effort
absolutely (unconditionally, or without any reservation), certainly
this obstacle is an evil to thee considered as a rational animal.
But if thou takest into consideration the usual course of things,
thou hast not yet been injured nor even impeded. The things however
which are proper to the understanding no other man is used to impede,
for neither fire, nor iron, nor tyrant, nor abuse, touches it in any
way. When it has been made a sphere, it continues a sphere.

It is not fit that I should give myself pain, for I have never intentionally
given pain even to another. 

Different things delight different people. But it is my delight to
keep the ruling faculty sound without turning away either from any
man or from any of the things which happen to men, but looking at
and receiving all with welcome eyes and using everything according
to its value. 

See that thou secure this present time to thyself: for those who rather
pursue posthumous fame do consider that the men of after time will
be exactly such as these whom they cannot bear now; and both are mortal.
And what is it in any way to thee if these men of after time utter
this or that sound, or have this or that opinion about thee?

Take me and cast me where thou wilt; for there I shall keep my divine
part tranquil, that is, content, if it can feel and act conformably
to its proper constitution. Is this change of place sufficient reason
why my soul should be unhappy and worse than it was, depressed, expanded,
shrinking, affrighted? And what wilt thou find which is sufficient
reason for this? 

Nothing can happen to any man which is not a human accident, nor to
an ox which is not according to the nature of an ox, nor to a vine
which is not according to the nature of a vine, nor to a stone which
is not proper to a stone. If then there happens to each thing both
what is usual and natural, why shouldst thou complain? For the common
nature brings nothing which may not be borne by thee. 

If thou art pained by any external thing, it is not this thing that
disturbs thee, but thy own judgement about it. And it is in thy power
to wipe out this judgement now. But if anything in thy own disposition
gives thee pain, who hinders thee from correcting thy opinion? And
even if thou art pained because thou art not doing some particular
thing which seems to thee to be right, why dost thou not rather act
than complain?- But some insuperable obstacle is in the way?- Do not
be grieved then, for the cause of its not being done depends not on
thee.- But it is not worth while to live if this cannot be done.-
Take thy departure then from life contentedly, just as he dies who
is in full activity, and well pleased too with the things which are
obstacles. 

Remember that the ruling faculty is invincible, when self-collected
it is satisfied with itself, if it does nothing which it does not
choose to do, even if it resist from mere obstinacy. What then will
it be when it forms a judgement about anything aided by reason and
deliberately? Therefore the mind which is free from passions is a
citadel, for man has nothing more secure to which he can fly for,
refuge and for the future be inexpugnable. He then who has not seen
this is an ignorant man; but he who has seen it and does not fly to
this refuge is unhappy. 

Say nothing more to thyself than what the first appearances report.
Suppose that it has been reported to thee that a certain person speaks
ill of thee. This has been reported; but that thou hast been injured,
that has not been reported. I see that my child is sick. I do see;
but that he is in danger, I do not see. Thus then always abide by
the first appearances, and add nothing thyself from within, and then
nothing happens to thee. Or rather add something, like a man who knows
everything that happens in the world. 

A cucumber is bitter.- Throw it away.- There are briars in the road.-
Turn aside from them.- This is enough. Do not add, And why were such
things made in the world? For thou wilt be ridiculed by a man who
is acquainted with nature, as thou wouldst be ridiculed by a carpenter
and shoemaker if thou didst find fault because thou seest in their
workshop shavings and cuttings from the things which they make. And
yet they have places into which they can throw these shavings and
cuttings, and the universal nature has no external space; but the
wondrous part of her art is that though she has circumscribed herself,
everything within her which appears to decay and to grow old and to
be useless she changes into herself, and again makes other new things
from these very same, so that she requires neither substance from
without nor wants a place into which she may cast that which decays.
She is content then with her own space, and her own matter and her
own art. 

Neither in thy actions be sluggish nor in thy conversation without
method, nor wandering in thy thoughts, nor let there be in thy soul
inward contention nor external effusion, nor in life be so busy as
to have no leisure. 

Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse thee. What then
can these things do to prevent thy mind from remaining pure, wise,
sober, just? For instance, if a man should stand by a limpid pure
spring, and curse it, the spring never ceases sending up potable water;
and if he should cast clay into it or filth, it will speedily disperse
them and wash them out, and will not be at all polluted. How then
shalt thou possess a perpetual fountain and not a mere well? By forming
thyself hourly to freedom conjoined with contentment, simplicity and
modesty. 

He who does not know what the world is, does not know where he is.
And he who does not know for what purpose the world exists, does not
know who he is, nor what the world is. But he who has failed in any
one of these things could not even say for what purpose he exists
himself. What then dost thou think of him who avoids or seeks the
praise of those who applaud, of men who know not either where they
are or who they are? 

Dost thou wish to be praised by a man who curses himself thrice every
hour? Wouldst thou wish to please a man who does not please himself?
Does a man please himself who repents of nearly everything that he
does? 

No longer let thy breathing only act in concert with the air which
surrounds thee, but let thy intelligence also now be in harmony with
the intelligence which embraces all things. For the intelligent power
is no less diffused in all parts and pervades all things for him who
is willing to draw it to him than the aerial power for him who is
able to respire it. 

Generally, wickedness does no harm at all to the universe; and particularly,
the wickedness of one man does no harm to another. It is only harmful
to him who has it in his power to be released from it, as soon as
he shall choose. 

To my own free will the free will of my neighbour is just as indifferent
as his poor breath and flesh. For though we are made especially for
the sake of one another, still the ruling power of each of us has
its own office, for otherwise my neighbour's wickedness would be my
harm, which God has not willed in order that my unhappiness may not
depend on another. 

The sun appears to be poured down, and in all directions indeed it
is diffused, yet it is not effused. For this diffusion is extension:
Accordingly its rays are called Extensions [aktines] because they
are extended [apo tou ekteinesthai]. But one may judge what kind of
a thing a ray is, if he looks at the sun's light passing through a
narrow opening into a darkened room, for it is extended in a right
line, and as it were is divided when it meets with any solid body
which stands in the way and intercepts the air beyond; but there the
light remains fixed and does not glide or fall off. Such then ought
to be the out-pouring and diffusion of the understanding, and it should
in no way be an effusion, but an extension, and it should make no
violent or impetuous collision with the obstacles which are in its
way; nor yet fall down, but be fixed and enlighten that which receives
it. For a body will deprive itself of the illumination, if it does
not admit it. 

He who fears death either fears the loss of sensation or a different
kind of sensation. But if thou shalt have no sensation, neither wilt
thou feel any harm; and if thou shalt acquire another kind of sensation,
thou wilt be a different kind of living being and thou wilt not cease
to live. 

Men exist for the sake of one another. Teach them then or bear with
them. 

In one way an arrow moves, in another way the mind. The mind indeed,
both when it exercises caution and when it is employed about inquiry,
moves straight onward not the less, and to its object. 

Enter into every man's ruling faculty; and also let every other man
enter into thine. 

He ho acts unjustly acts impiously. For since the universal nature
has made rational animals for the sake of one another to help one
another according to their deserts, but in no way to injure one another,
he who transgresses her will, is clearly guilty of impiety towards
the highest divinity. And he too who lies is guilty of impiety to
the same divinity; for the universal nature is the nature of things
that are; and things that are have a relation to all things that come
into existence. And further, this universal nature is named truth,
and is the prime cause of all things that are true. He then who lies
intentionally is guilty of impiety inasmuch as he acts unjustly by
deceiving; and he also who lies unintentionally, inasmuch as he is
at variance with the universal nature, and inasmuch as he disturbs
the order by fighting against the nature of the world; for he fights
against it, who is moved of himself to that which is contrary to truth,
for he had received powers from nature through the neglect of which
he is not able now to distinguish falsehood from truth. And indeed
he who pursues pleasure as good, and avoids pain as evil, is guilty
of impiety. For of necessity such a man must often find fault with
the universal nature, alleging that it assigns things to the bad and
the good contrary to their deserts, because frequently the bad are
in the enjoyment of pleasure and possess the things which procure
pleasure, but the good have pain for their share and the things which
cause pain. And further, he who is afraid of pain will sometimes also
be afraid of some of the things which will happen in the world, and
even this is impiety. And he who pursues pleasure will not abstain
from injustice, and this is plainly impiety. Now with respect to the
things towards which the universal nature is equally affected- for
it would not have made both, unless it was equally affected towards
both- towards these they who wish to follow nature should be of the
same mind with it, and equally affected. With respect to pain, then,
and pleasure, or death and life, or honour and dishonour, which the
universal nature employs equally, whoever is not equally affected
is manifestly acting impiously. And I say that the universal nature
employs them equally, instead of saying that they happen alike to
those who are produced in continuous series and to those who come
after them by virtue of a certain original movement of Providence,
according to which it moved from a certain beginning to this ordering
of things, having conceived certain principles of the things which
were to be, and having determined powers productive of beings and
of changes and of such like successions. 

It would be a man's happiest lot to depart from mankind without having
had any taste of lying and hypocrisy and luxury and pride. However
to breathe out one's life when a man has had enough of these things
is the next best voyage, as the saying is. Hast thou determined to
abide with vice, and has not experience yet induced thee to fly from
this pestilence? For the destruction of the understanding is a pestilence,
much more indeed than any such corruption and change of this atmosphere
which surrounds us. For this corruption is a pestilence of animals
so far as they are animals; but the other is a pestilence of men so
far as they are men. 

Do not despise death, but be well content with it, since this too
is one of those things which nature wills. For such as it is to be
young and to grow old, and to increase and to reach maturity, and
to have teeth and beard and grey hairs, and to beget, and to be pregnant
and to bring forth, and all the other natural operations which the
seasons of thy life bring, such also is dissolution. This, then, is
consistent with the character of a reflecting man, to be neither careless
nor impatient nor contemptuous with respect to death, but to wait
for it as one of the operations of nature. As thou now waitest for
the time when the child shall come out of thy wife's womb, so be ready
for the time when thy soul shall fall out of this envelope. But if
thou requirest also a vulgar kind of comfort which shall reach thy
heart, thou wilt be made best reconciled to death by observing the
objects from which thou art going to be removed, and the morals of
those with whom thy soul will no longer be mingled. For it is no way
right to be offended with men, but it is thy duty to care for them
and to bear with them gently; and yet to remember that thy departure
will be not from men who have the same principles as thyself. For
this is the only thing, if there be any, which could draw us the contrary
way and attach us to life, to be permitted to live with those who
have the same principles as ourselves. But now thou seest how great
is the trouble arising from the discordance of those who live together,
so that thou mayest say, Come quick, O death, lest perchance I, too,
should forget myself. 

He who does wrong does wrong against himself. He who acts unjustly
acts unjustly to himself, because he makes himself bad. 

He often acts unjustly who does not do a certain thing; not only he
who does a certain thing. 

Thy present opinion founded on understanding, and thy present conduct
directed to social good, and thy present disposition of contentment
with everything which happens- that is enough. 

Wipe out imagination: check desire: extinguish appetite: keep the
ruling faculty in its own power. 

Among the animals which have not reason one life is distributed; but
among reasonable animals one intelligent soul is distributed: just
as there is one earth of all things which are of an earthy nature,
and we see by one light, and breathe one air, all of us that have
the faculty of vision and all that have life. 

All things which participate in anything which is common to them all
move towards that which is of the same kind with themselves. Everything
which is earthy turns towards the earth, everything which is liquid
flows together, and everything which is of an aerial kind does the
same, so that they require something to keep them asunder, and the
application of force. Fire indeed moves upwards on account of the
elemental fire, but it is so ready to be kindled together with all
the fire which is here, that even every substance which is somewhat
dry, is easily ignited, because there is less mingled with it of that
which is a hindrance to ignition. Accordingly then everything also
which participates in the common intelligent nature moves in like
manner towards that which is of the same kind with itself, or moves
even more. For so much as it is superior in comparison with all other
things, in the same degree also is it more ready to mingle with and
to be fused with that which is akin to it. Accordingly among animals
devoid of reason we find swarms of bees, and herds of cattle, and
the nurture of young birds, and in a manner, loves; for even in animals
there are souls, and that power which brings them together is seen
to exert itself in the superior degree, and in such a way as never
has been observed in plants nor in stones nor in trees. But in rational
animals there are political communities and friendships, and families
and meetings of people; and in wars, treaties and armistices. But
in the things which are still superior, even though they are separated
from one another, unity in a manner exists, as in the stars. Thus
the ascent to the higher degree is able to produce a sympathy even
in things which are separated. See, then, what now takes place. For
only intelligent animals have now forgotten this mutual desire and
inclination, and in them alone the property of flowing together is
not seen. But still though men strive to avoid this union, they are
caught and held by it, for their nature is too strong for them; and
thou wilt see what I say, if thou only observest. Sooner, then, will
one find anything earthy which comes in contact with no earthy thing
than a man altogether separated from other men. 

Both man and God and the universe produce fruit; at the proper seasons
each produces it. But if usage has especially fixed these terms to
the vine and like things, this is nothing. Reason produces fruit both
for all and for itself, and there are produced from it other things
of the same kind as reason itself. 

If thou art able, correct by teaching those who do wrong; but if thou
canst not, remember that indulgence is given to thee for this purpose.
And the gods, too, are indulgent to such persons; and for some purposes
they even help them to get health, wealth, reputation; so kind they
are. And it is in thy power also; or say, who hinders thee?

Labour not as one who is wretched, nor yet as one who would be pitied
or admired: but direct thy will to one thing only, to put thyself
in motion and to check thyself, as the social reason requires.

To-day I have got out of all trouble, or rather I have cast out all
trouble, for it was not outside, but within and in my opinions.

All things are the same, familiar in experience, and ephemeral in
time, and worthless in the matter. Everything now is just as it was
in the time of those whom we have buried. 

Things stand outside of us, themselves by themselves, neither knowing
aught of themselves, nor expressing any judgement. What is it, then,
which does judge about them? The ruling faculty. 

Not in passivity, but in activity lie the evil and the good of the
rational social animal, just as his virtue and his vice lie not in
passivity, but in activity. 

For the stone which has been thrown up it is no evil to come down,
nor indeed any good to have been carried up. 

Penetrate inwards into men's leading principles, and thou wilt see
what judges thou art afraid of, and what kind of judges they are of
themselves. 

All things are changing: and thou thyself art in continuous mutation
and in a manner in continuous destruction, and the whole universe
too. 

It is thy duty to leave another man's wrongful act there where it
is. 

Termination of activity, cessation from movement and opinion, and
in a sense their death, is no evil. Turn thy thoughts now to the consideration
of thy life, thy life as a child, as a youth, thy manhood, thy old
age, for in these also every change was a death. Is this anything
to fear? Turn thy thoughts now to thy life under thy grandfather,
then to thy life under thy mother, then to thy life under thy father;
and as thou findest many other differences and changes and terminations,
ask thyself, Is this anything to fear? In like manner, then, neither
are the termination and cessation and change of thy whole life a thing
to be afraid of. 

Hasten to examine thy own ruling faculty and that of the universe
and that of thy neighbour: thy own that thou mayest make it just:
and that of the universe, that thou mayest remember of what thou art
a part; and that of thy neighbour, that thou mayest know whether he
has acted ignorantly or with knowledge, and that thou mayest also
consider that his ruling faculty is akin to thine. 

As thou thyself art a component part of a social system, so let every
act of thine be a component part of social life. Whatever act of thine
then has no reference either immediately or remotely to a social end,
this tears asunder thy life, and does not allow it to be one, and
it is of the nature of a mutiny, just as when in a popular assembly
a man acting by himself stands apart from the general agreement.

Quarrels of little children and their sports, and poor spirits carrying
about dead bodies, such is everything; and so what is exhibited in
the representation of the mansions of the dead strikes our eyes more
clearly. 

Examine into the quality of the form of an object, and detach it altogether
from its material part, and then contemplate it; then determine the
time, the longest which a thing of this peculiar form is naturally
made to endure. 

Thou hast endured infinite troubles through not being contented with
thy ruling faculty, when it does the things which it is constituted
by nature to do. But enough of this. 

When another blames thee or hates thee, or when men say about thee
anything injurious, approach their poor souls, penetrate within, and
see what kind of men they are. Thou wilt discover that there is no
reason to take any trouble that these men may have this or that opinion
about thee. However thou must be well disposed towards them, for by
nature they are friends. And the gods too aid them in all ways, by
dreams, by signs, towards the attainment of those things on which
they set a value. 

The periodic movements of the universe are the same, up and down from
age to age. And either the universal intelligence puts itself in motion
for every separate effect, and if this is so, be thou content with
that which is the result of its activity; or it puts itself in motion
once, and everything else comes by way of sequence in a manner; or
indivisible elements are the origin of all things.- In a word, if
there is a god, all is well; and if chance rules, do not thou also
be governed by it. 

Soon will the earth cover us all: then the earth, too, will change,
and the things also which result from change will continue to change
for ever, and these again for ever. For if a man reflects on the changes
and transformations which follow one another like wave after wave
and their rapidity, he will despise everything which is perishable.

The universal cause is like a winter torrent: it carries everything
along with it. But how worthless are all these poor people who are
engaged in matters political, and, as they suppose, are playing the
philosopher! All drivellers. Well then, man: do what nature now requires.
Set thyself in motion, if it is in thy power, and do not look about
thee to see if any one will observe it; nor yet expect Plato's Republic:
but be content if the smallest thing goes on well, and consider such
an event to be no small matter. For who can change men's opinions?
And without a change of opinions what else is there than the slavery
of men who groan while they pretend to obey? Come now and tell me
of Alexander and Philip and Demetrius of Phalerum. They themselves
shall judge whether they discovered what the common nature required,
and trained themselves accordingly. But if they acted like tragedy
heroes, no one has condemned me to imitate them. Simple and modest
is the work of philosophy. Draw me not aside to indolence and pride.

Look down from above on the countless herds of men and their countless
solemnities, and the infinitely varied voyagings in storms and calms,
and the differences among those who are born, who live together, and
die. And consider, too, the life lived by others in olden time, and
the life of those who will live after thee, and the life now lived
among barbarous nations, and how many know not even thy name, and
how many will soon forget it, and how they who perhaps now are praising
thee will very soon blame thee, and that neither a posthumous name
is of any value, nor reputation, nor anything else. 

Let there be freedom from perturbations with respect to the things
which come from the external cause; and let there be justice in the
things done by virtue of the internal cause, that is, let there be
movement and action terminating in this, in social acts, for this
is according to thy nature. 

Thou canst remove out of the way many useless things among those which
disturb thee, for they lie entirely in thy opinion; and thou wilt
then gain for thyself ample space by comprehending the whole universe
in thy mind, and by contemplating the eternity of time, and observing
the rapid change of every several thing, how short is the time from
birth to dissolution, and the illimitable time before birth as well
as the equally boundless time after dissolution. 

All that thou seest will quickly perish, and those who have been spectators
of its dissolution will very soon perish too. And he who dies at the
extremest old age will be brought into the same condition with him
who died prematurely. 

What are these men's leading principles, and about what kind of things
are they busy, and for what kind of reasons do they love and honour?
Imagine that thou seest their poor souls laid bare. When they think
that they do harm by their blame or good by their praise, what an
idea! 

Loss is nothing else than change. But the universal nature delights
in change, and in obedience to her all things are now done well, and
from eternity have been done in like form, and will be such to time
without end. What, then, dost thou say? That all things have been
and all things always will be bad, and that no power has ever been
found in so many gods to rectify these things, but the world has been
condemned to be found in never ceasing evil? 

The rottenness of the matter which is the foundation of everything!
Water, dust, bones, filth: or again, marble rocks, the callosities
of the earth; and gold and silver, the sediments; and garments, only
bits of hair; and purple dye, blood; and everything else is of the
same kind. And that which is of the nature of breath is also another
thing of the same kind, changing from this to that. 

Enough of this wretched life and murmuring and apish tricks. Why art
thou disturbed? What is there new in this? What unsettles thee? Is
it the form of the thing? Look at it. Or is it the matter? Look at
it. But besides these there is nothing. Towards the gods, then, now
become at last more simple and better. It is the same whether we examine
these things for a hundred years or three. 

If any man has done wrong, the harm is his own. But perhaps he has
not done wrong. 

Either all things proceed from one intelligent source and come together
as in one body, and the part ought not to find fault with what is
done for the benefit of the whole; or there are only atoms, and nothing
else than mixture and dispersion. Why, then, art thou disturbed? Say
to the ruling faculty, Art thou dead, art thou corrupted, art thou
playing the hypocrite, art thou become a beast, dost thou herd and
feed with the rest? 

Either the gods have no power or they have power. If, then, they have
no power, why dost thou pray to them? But if they have power, why
dost thou not pray for them to give thee the faculty of not fearing
any of the things which thou fearest, or of not desiring any of the
things which thou desirest, or not being pained at anything, rather
than pray that any of these things should not happen or happen? for
certainly if they can co-operate with men, they can co-operate for
these purposes. But perhaps thou wilt say, the gods have placed them
in thy power. Well, then, is it not better to use what is in thy power
like a free man than to desire in a slavish and abject way what is
not in thy power? And who has told thee that the gods do not aid us
even in the things which are in our power? Begin, then, to pray for
such things, and thou wilt see. One man prays thus: How shall I be
able to lie with that woman? Do thou pray thus: How shall I not desire
to lie with her? Another prays thus: How shall I be released from
this? Another prays: How shall I not desire to be released? Another
thus: How shall I not lose my little son? Thou thus: How shall I not
be afraid to lose him? In fine, turn thy prayers this way, and see
what comes. 

Epicurus says, In my sickness my conversation was not about my bodily
sufferings, nor, says he, did I talk on such subjects to those who
visited me; but I continued to discourse on the nature of things as
before, keeping to this main point, how the mind, while participating
in such movements as go on in the poor flesh, shall be free from perturbations
and maintain its proper good. Nor did I, he says, give the physicians
an opportunity of putting on solemn looks, as if they were doing something
great, but my life went on well and happily. Do, then, the same that
he did both in sickness, if thou art sick, and in any other circumstances;
for never to desert philosophy in any events that may befall us, nor
to hold trifling talk either with an ignorant man or with one unacquainted
with nature, is a principle of all schools of philosophy; but to be
intent only on that which thou art now doing and on the instrument
by which thou doest it. 

When thou art offended with any man's shameless conduct, immediately
ask thyself, Is it possible, then, that shameless men should not be
in the world? It is not possible. Do not, then, require what is impossible.
For this man also is one of those shameless men who must of necessity
be in the world. Let the same considerations be present to thy mind
in the case of the knave, and the faithless man, and of every man
who does wrong in any way. For at the same time that thou dost remind
thyself that it is impossible that such kind of men should not exist,
thou wilt become more kindly disposed towards every one individually.
It is useful to perceive this, too, immediately when the occasion
arises, what virtue nature has given to man to oppose to every wrongful
act. For she has given to man, as an antidote against the stupid man,
mildness, and against another kind of man some other power. And in
all cases it is possible for thee to correct by teaching the man who
is gone astray; for every man who errs misses his object and is gone
astray. Besides wherein hast thou been injured? For thou wilt find
that no one among those against whom thou art irritated has done anything
by which thy mind could be made worse; but that which is evil to thee
and harmful has its foundation only in the mind. And what harm is
done or what is there strange, if the man who has not been instructed
does the acts of an uninstructed man? Consider whether thou shouldst
not rather blame thyself, because thou didst not expect such a man
to err in such a way. For thou hadst means given thee by thy reason
to suppose that it was likely that he would commit this error, and
yet thou hast forgotten and art amazed that he has erred. But most
of all when thou blamest a man as faithless or ungrateful, turn to
thyself. For the fault is manifestly thy own, whether thou didst trust
that a man who had such a disposition would keep his promise, or when
conferring thy kindness thou didst not confer it absolutely, nor yet
in such way as to have received from thy very act all the profit.
For what more dost thou want when thou hast done a man a service?
Art thou not content that thou hast done something conformable to
thy nature, and dost thou seek to be paid for it? Just as if the eye
demanded a recompense for seeing, or the feet for walking. For as
these members are formed for a particular purpose, and by working
according to their several constitutions obtain what is their own;
so also as man is formed by nature to acts of benevolence, when he
has done anything benevolent or in any other way conducive to the
common interest, he has acted conformably to his constitution, and
he gets what is his own. 



Wilt thou, then, my soul, never be good and simple and one and naked,
more manifest than the body which surrounds thee? Wilt thou never
enjoy an affectionate and contented disposition? Wilt thou never be
full and without a want of any kind, longing for nothing more, nor
desiring anything, either animate or inanimate, for the enjoyment
of pleasures? Nor yet desiring time wherein thou shalt have longer
enjoyment, or place, or pleasant climate, or society of men with whom
thou mayest live in harmony? But wilt thou be satisfied with thy present
condition, and pleased with all that is about thee, and wilt thou
convince thyself that thou hast everything and that it comes from
the gods, that everything is well for thee, and will be well whatever
shall please them, and whatever they shall give for the conservation
of the perfect living being, the good and just and beautiful, which
generates and holds together all things, and contains and embraces
all things which are dissolved for the production of other like things?
Wilt thou never be such that thou shalt so dwell in community with
gods and men as neither to find fault with them at all, nor to be
condemned by them? 

Observe what thy nature requires, so far as thou art governed by nature
only: then do it and accept it, if thy nature, so far as thou art
a living being, shall not be made worse by it. 

And next thou must observe what thy nature requires so far as thou
art a living being. And all this thou mayest allow thyself, if thy
nature, so far as thou art a rational animal, shall not be made worse
by it. But the rational animal is consequently also a political (social)
animal. Use these rules, then, and trouble thyself about nothing else.

Everything which happens either happens in such wise as thou art formed
by nature to bear it, or as thou art not formed by nature to bear
it. If, then, it happens to thee in such way as thou art formed by
nature to bear it, do not complain, but bear it as thou art formed
by nature to bear it. But if it happens in such wise as thou art not
formed by nature to bear it, do not complain, for it will perish after
it has consumed thee. Remember, however, that thou art formed by nature
to bear everything, with respect to which it depends on thy own opinion
to make it endurable and tolerable, by thinking that it is either
thy interest or thy duty to do this. 

If a man is mistaken, instruct him kindly and show him his error.
But if thou art not able, blame thyself, or blame not even thyself.

Whatever may happen to thee, it was prepared for thee from all eternity;
and the implication of causes was from eternity spinning the thread
of thy being, and of that which is incident to it. 

Whether the universe is a concourse of atoms, or nature is a system,
let this first be established, that I am a part of the whole which
is governed by nature; next, I am in a manner intimately related to
the parts which are of the same kind with myself. For remembering
this, inasmuch as I am a part, I shall be discontented with none of
the things which are assigned to me out of the whole; for nothing
is injurious to the part, if it is for the advantage of the whole.
For the whole contains nothing which is not for its advantage; and
all natures indeed have this common principle, but the nature of the
universe has this principle besides, that it cannot be compelled even
by any external cause to generate anything harmful to itself. By remembering,
then, that I am a part of such a whole, I shall be content with everything
that happens. And inasmuch as I am in a manner intimately related
to the parts which are of the same kind with myself, I shall do nothing
unsocial, but I shall rather direct myself to the things which are
of the same kind with myself, and I shall turn an my efforts to the
common interest, and divert them from the contrary. Now, if these
things are done so, life must flow on happily, just as thou mayest
observe that the life of a citizen is happy, who continues a course
of action which is advantageous to his fellow-citizens, and is content
with whatever the state may assign to him. 

The parts of the whole, everything, I mean, which is naturally comprehended
in the universe, must of necessity perish; but let this be understood
in this sense, that they must undergo change. But if this is naturally
both an evil and a necessity for the parts, the whole would not continue
to exist in a good condition, the parts being subject to change and
constituted so as to perish in various ways. For whether did nature
herself design to do evil to the things which are parts of herself,
and to make them subject to evil and of necessity fall into evil,
or have such results happened without her knowing it? Both these suppositions,
indeed, are incredible. But if a man should even drop the term Nature
(as an efficient power), and should speak of these things as natural,
even then it would be ridiculous to affirm at the same time that the
parts of the whole are in their nature subject to change, and at the
same time to be surprised or vexed as if something were happening
contrary to nature, particularly as the dissolution of things is into
those things of which each thing is composed. For there is either
a dispersion of the elements out of which everything has been compounded,
or a change from the solid to the earthy and from the airy to the
aerial, so that these parts are taken back into the universal reason,
whether this at certain periods is consumed by fire or renewed by
eternal changes. And do not imagine that the solid and the airy part
belong to thee from the time of generation. For all this received
its accretion only yesterday and the day before, as one may say, from
the food and the air which is inspired. This, then, which has received
the accretion, changes, not that which thy mother brought forth. But
suppose that this which thy mother brought forth implicates thee very
much with that other part, which has the peculiar quality of change,
this is nothing in fact in the way of objection to what is said.

When thou hast assumed these names, good, modest, true, rational,
a man of equanimity, and magnanimous, take care that thou dost not
change these names; and if thou shouldst lose them, quickly return
to them. And remember that the term Rational was intended to signify
a discriminating attention to every several thing and freedom from
negligence; and that Equanimity is the voluntary acceptance of the
things which are assigned to thee by the common nature; and that Magnanimity
is the elevation of the intelligent part above the pleasurable or
painful sensations of the flesh, and above that poor thing called
fame, and death, and all such things. If, then, thou maintainest thyself
in the possession of these names, without desiring to be called by
these names by others, thou wilt be another person and wilt enter
on another life. For to continue to be such as thou hast hitherto
been, and to be tom in pieces and defiled in such a life, is the character
of a very stupid man and one overfond of his life, and like those
half-devoured fighters with wild beasts, who though covered with wounds
and gore, still intreat to be kept to the following day, though they
will be exposed in the same state to the same claws and bites. Therefore
fix thyself in the possession of these few names: and if thou art
able to abide in them, abide as if thou wast removed to certain islands
of the Happy. But if thou shalt perceive that thou fallest out of
them and dost not maintain thy hold, go courageously into some nook
where thou shalt maintain them, or even depart at once from life,
not in passion, but with simplicity and freedom and modesty, after
doing this one laudable thing at least in thy life, to have gone out
of it thus. In order, however, to the remembrance of these names,
it will greatly help thee, if thou rememberest the gods, and that
they wish not to be flattered, but wish all reasonable beings to be
made like themselves; and if thou rememberest that what does the work
of a fig-tree is a fig-tree, and that what does the work of a dog
is a dog, and that what does the work of a bee is a bee, and that
what does the work of a man is a man. 

Mimi, war, astonishment, torpor, slavery, will daily wipe out those
holy principles of thine. How many things without studying nature
dost thou imagine, and how many dost thou neglect? But it is thy duty
so to look on and so to do everything, that at the same time the power
of dealing with circumstances is perfected, and the contemplative
faculty is exercised, and the confidence which comes from the knowledge
of each several thing is maintained without showing it, but yet not
concealed. For when wilt thou enjoy simplicity, when gravity, and
when the knowledge of every several thing, both what it is in substance,
and what place it has in the universe, and how long it is formed to
exist and of what things it is compounded, and to whom it can belong,
and who are able both to give it and take it away? 

A spider is proud when it has caught a fly, and another when he has
caught a poor hare, and another when he has taken a little fish in
a net, and another when he has taken wild boars, and another when
he has taken bears, and another when he has taken Sarmatians. Are
not these robbers, if thou examinest their opinions? 

Acquire the contemplative way of seeing how all things change into
one another, and constantly attend to it, and exercise thyself about
this part of philosophy. For nothing is so much adapted to produce
magnanimity. Such a man has put off the body, and as he sees that
he must, no one knows how soon, go away from among men and leave everything
here, he gives himself up entirely to just doing in all his actions,
and in everything else that happens he resigns himself to the universal
nature. But as to what any man shall say or think about him or do
against him, he never even thinks of it, being himself contented with
these two things, with acting justly in what he now does, and being
satisfied with what is now assigned to him; and he lays aside all
distracting and busy pursuits, and desires nothing else than to accomplish
the straight course through the law, and by accomplishing the straight
course to follow God. 

What need is there of suspicious fear, since it is in thy power to
inquire what ought to be done? And if thou seest clear, go by this
way content, without turning back: but if thou dost not see clear,
stop and take the best advisers. But if any other things oppose thee,
go on according to thy powers with due consideration, keeping to that
which appears to be just. For it is best to reach this object, and
if thou dost fail, let thy failure be in attempting this. He who follows
reason in all things is both tranquil and active at the same time,
and also cheerful and collected. 

Inquire of thyself as soon as thou wakest from sleep, whether it will
make any difference to thee, if another does what is just and right.
It will make no difference. 

Thou hast not forgotten, I suppose, that those who assume arrogant
airs in bestowing their praise or blame on others, are such as they
are at bed and at board, and thou hast not forgotten what they do,
and what they avoid and what they pursue, and how they steal and how
they rob, not with hands and feet, but with their most valuable part,
by means of which there is produced, when a man chooses, fidelity,
modesty, truth, law, a good daemon (happiness)? 

To her who gives and takes back all, to nature, the man who is instructed
and modest says, Give what thou wilt; take back what thou wilt. And
he says this not proudly, but obediently and well pleased with her.

Short is the little which remains to thee of life. Live as on a mountain.
For it makes no difference whether a man lives there or here, if he
lives everywhere in the world as in a state (political community).
Let men see, let them know a real man who lives according to nature.
If they cannot endure him, let them kill him. For that is better than
to live thus as men do. 

No longer talk at all about the kind of man that a good man ought
to be, but be such. 

Constantly contemplate the whole of time and the whole of substance,
and consider that all individual things as to substance are a grain
of a fig, and as to time, the turning of a gimlet. 

Look at everything that exists, and observe that it is already in
dissolution and in change, and as it were putrefaction or dispersion,
or that everything is so constituted by nature as to die.

Consider what men are when they are eating, sleeping, generating,
easing themselves and so forth. Then what kind of men they are when
they are imperious and arrogant, or angry and scolding from their
elevated place. But a short time ago to how many they were slaves
and for what things; and after a little time consider in what a condition
they will be. 

That is for the good of each thing, which the universal nature brings
to each. And it is for its good at the time when nature brings it.

"The earth loves the shower"; and "the solemn aether loves": and the
universe loves to make whatever is about to be. I say then to the
universe, that I love as thou lovest. And is not this too said, that
"this or that loves (is wont) to be produced"? 

Either thou livest here and hast already accustomed thyself to it,
or thou art going away, and this was thy own will; or thou art dying
and hast discharged thy duty. But besides these things there is nothing.
Be of good cheer, then. 

Let this always be plain to thee, that this piece of land is like
any other; and that all things here are the same with things on top
of a mountain, or on the sea-shore, or wherever thou choosest to be.
For thou wilt find just what Plato says, Dwelling within the walls
of a city as in a shepherd's fold on a mountain. 

What is my ruling faculty now to me? And of what nature am I now making
it? And for what purpose am I now using it? Is it void of understanding?
Is it loosed and rent asunder from social life? Is it melted into
and mixed with the poor flesh so as to move together with it?

He who flies from his master is a runaway; but the law is master,
and he who breaks the law is a runaway. And he also who is grieved
or angry or afraid, is dissatisfied because something has been or
is or shall be of the things which are appointed by him who rules
all things, and he is Law, and assigns to every man what is fit. He
then who fears or is grieved or is angry is a runaway. 

A man deposits seed in a womb and goes away, and then another cause
takes it, and labours on it and makes a child. What a thing from such
a material! Again, the child passes food down through the throat,
and then another cause takes it and makes perception and motion, and
in fine life and strength and other things; how many and how strange
I Observe then the things which are produced in such a hidden way,
and see the power just as we see the power which carries things downwards
and upwards, not with the eyes, but still no less plainly.

Constantly consider how all things such as they now are, in time past
also were; and consider that they will be the same again. And place
before thy eyes entire dramas and stages of the same form, whatever
thou hast learned from thy experience or from older history; for example,
the whole court of Hadrian, and the whole court of Antoninus, and
the whole court of Philip, Alexander, Croesus; for all those were
such dramas as we see now, only with different actors. 

Imagine every man who is grieved at anything or discontented to be
like a pig which is sacrificed and kicks and screams. 

Like this pig also is he who on his bed in silence laments the bonds
in which we are held. And consider that only to the rational animal
is it given to follow voluntarily what happens; but simply to follow
is a necessity imposed on all. 

Severally on the occasion of everything that thou doest, pause and
ask thyself, if death is a dreadful thing because it deprives thee
of this. 

When thou art offended at any man's fault, forthwith turn to thyself
and reflect in what like manner thou dost err thyself; for example,
in thinking that money is a good thing, or pleasure, or a bit of reputation,
and the like. For by attending to this thou wilt quickly forget thy
anger, if this consideration also is added, that the man is compelled:
for what else could he do? or, if thou art able, take away from him
the compulsion. 

When thou hast seen Satyron the Socratic, think of either Eutyches
or Hymen, and when thou hast seen Euphrates, think of Eutychion or
Silvanus, and when thou hast seen Alciphron think of Tropaeophorus,
and when thou hast seen Xenophon think of Crito or Severus, and when
thou hast looked on thyself, think of any other Caesar, and in the
case of every one do in like manner. Then let this thought be in thy
mind, Where then are those men? Nowhere, or nobody knows where. For
thus continuously thou wilt look at human things as smoke and nothing
at all; especially if thou reflectest at the same time that what has
once changed will never exist again in the infinite duration of time.
But thou, in what a brief space of time is thy existence? And why
art thou not content to pass through this short time in an orderly
way? What matter and opportunity for thy activity art thou avoiding?
For what else are all these things, except exercises for the reason,
when it has viewed carefully and by examination into their nature
the things which happen in life? Persevere then until thou shalt have
made these things thy own, as the stomach which is strengthened makes
all things its own, as the blazing fire makes flame and brightness
out of everything that is thrown into it. 

Let it not be in any man's power to say truly of thee that thou art
not simple or that thou are not good; but let him be a liar whoever
shall think anything of this kind about thee; and this is altogether
in thy power. For who is he that shall hinder thee from being good
and simple? Do thou only determine to live no longer, unless thou
shalt be such. For neither does reason allow thee to live, if thou
art not such. 

What is that which as to this material (our life) can be done or said
in the way most conformable to reason. For whatever this may be, it
is in thy power to do it or to say it, and do not make excuses that
thou art hindered. Thou wilt not cease to lament till thy mind is
in such a condition that, what luxury is to those who enjoy pleasure,
such shall be to thee, in the matter which is subjected and presented
to thee, the doing of the things which are conformable to man's constitution;
for a man ought to consider as an enjoyment everything which it is
in his power to do according to his own nature. And it is in his power
everywhere. Now, it is not given to a cylinder to move everywhere
by its own motion, nor yet to water nor to fire, nor to anything else
which is governed by nature or an irrational soul, for the things
which check them and stand in the way are many. But intelligence and
reason are able to go through everything that opposes them, and in
such manner as they are formed by nature and as they choose. Place
before thy eyes this facility with which the reason will be carried
through all things, as fire upwards, as a stone downwards, as a cylinder
down an inclined surface, and seek for nothing further. For all other
obstacles either affect the body only which is a dead thing; or, except
through opinion and the yielding of the reason itself, they do not
crush nor do any harm of any kind; for if they did, he who felt it
would immediately become bad. Now, in the case of all things which
have a certain constitution, whatever harm may happen to any of them,
that which is so affected becomes consequently worse; but in the like
case, a man becomes both better, if one may say so, and more worthy
of praise by making a right use of these accidents. And finally remember
that nothing harms him who is really a citizen, which does not harm
the state; nor yet does anything harm the state, which does not harm
law (order); and of these things which are called misfortunes not
one harms law. What then does not harm law does not harm either state
or citizen. 

To him who is penetrated by true principles even the briefest precept
is sufficient, and any common precept, to remind him that he should
be free from grief and fear. For example- 

Leaves, some the wind scatters on the ground- 
So is the race of men. Leaves, also, are thy children; and leaves,
too, are they who cry out as if they were worthy of credit and bestow
their praise, or on the contrary curse, or secretly blame and sneer;
and leaves, in like manner, are those who shall receive and transmit
a man's fame to aftertimes. For all such things as these "are produced
in the season of spring," as the poet says; then the wind casts them
down; then the forest produces other leaves in their places. But a
brief existence is common to all things, and yet thou avoidest and
pursuest all things as if they would be eternal. A little time, and
thou shalt close thy eyes; and him who has attended thee to thy grave
another soon will lament. 

The healthy eye ought to see all visible things and not to say, I
wish for green things; for this is the condition of a diseased eye.
And the healthy hearing and smelling ought to be ready to perceive
all that can be heard and smelled. And the healthy stomach ought to
be with respect to all food just as the mill with respect to all things
which it is formed to grind. And accordingly the healthy understanding
ought to be prepared for everything which happens; but that which
says, Let my dear children live, and let all men praise whatever I
may do, is an eye which seeks for green things, or teeth which seek
for soft things. 

There is no man so fortunate that there shall not be by him when he
is dying some who are pleased with what is going to happen. Suppose
that he was a good and wise man, will there not be at last some one
to say to himself, Let us at last breathe freely being relieved from
this schoolmaster? It is true that he was harsh to none of us, but
I perceived that he tacitly condemns us.- This is what is said of
a good man. But in our own case how many other things are there for
which there are many who wish to get rid of us. Thou wilt consider
this then when thou art dying, and thou wilt depart more contentedly
by reflecting thus: I am going away from such a life, in which even
my associates in behalf of whom I have striven so much, prayed, and
cared, themselves wish me to depart, hoping perchance to get some
little advantage by it. Why then should a man cling to a longer stay
here? Do not however for this reason go away less kindly disposed
to them, but preserving thy own character, and friendly and benevolent
and mild, and on the other hand not as if thou wast torn away; but
as when a man dies a quiet death, the poor soul is easily separated
from the body, such also ought thy departure from men to be, for nature
united thee to them and associated thee. But does she now dissolve
the union? Well, I am separated as from kinsmen, not however dragged
resisting, but without compulsion; for this too is one of the things
according to nature. 

Accustom thyself as much as possible on the occasion of anything being
done by any person to inquire with thyself, For what object is this
man doing this? But begin with thyself, and examine thyself first.

Remember that this which pulls the strings is the thing which is hidden
within: this is the power of persuasion, this is life, this, if one
may so say, is man. In contemplating thyself never include the vessel
which surrounds thee and these instruments which are attached about
it. For they are like to an axe, differing only in this that they
grow to the body. For indeed there is no more use in these parts without
the cause which moves and checks them than in the weaver's shuttle,
and the writer's pen and the driver's whip. 



These are the properties of the rational soul: it sees itself, analyses
itself, and makes itself such as it chooses; the fruit which it bears
itself enjoys- for the fruits of plants and that in animals which
corresponds to fruits others enjoy- it obtains its own end, wherever
the limit of life may be fixed. Not as in a dance and in a play and
in such like things, where the whole action is incomplete, if anything
cuts it short; but in every part and wherever it may be stopped, it
makes what has been set before it full and complete, so that it can
say, I have what is my own. And further it traverses the whole universe,
and the surrounding vacuum, and surveys its form, and it extends itself
into the infinity of time, and embraces and comprehends the periodical
renovation of all things, and it comprehends that those who come after
us will see nothing new, nor have those before us seen anything more,
but in a manner he who is forty years old, if he has any understanding
at all, has seen by virtue of the uniformity that prevails all things
which have been and all that will be. This too is a property of the
rational soul, love of one's neighbour, and truth and modesty, and
to value nothing more more than itself, which is also the property
of Law. Thus then right reason differs not at all from the reason
of justice. 

Thou wilt set little value on pleasing song and dancing and the pancratium,
if thou wilt distribute the melody of the voice into its several sounds,
and ask thyself as to each, if thou art mastered by this; for thou
wilt be prevented by shame from confessing it: and in the matter of
dancing, if at each movement and attitude thou wilt do the same; and
the like also in the matter of the pancratium. In all things, then,
except virtue and the acts of virtue, remember to apply thyself to
their several parts, and by this division to come to value them little:
and apply this rule also to thy whole life. 

What a soul that is which is ready, if at any moment it must be separated
from the body, and ready either to be extinguished or dispersed or
continue to exist; but so that this readiness comes from a man's own
judgement, not from mere obstinacy, as with the Christians, but considerately
and with dignity and in a way to persuade another, without tragic
show. 

Have I done something for the general interest? Well then I have had
my reward. Let this always be present to thy mind, and never stop
doing such good. 

What is thy art? To be good. And how is this accomplished well except
by general principles, some about the nature of the universe, and
others about the proper constitution of man? 

At first tragedies were brought on the stage as means of reminding
men of the things which happen to them, and that it is according to
nature for things to happen so, and that, if you are delighted with
what is shown on the stage, you should not be troubled with that which
takes place on the larger stage. For you see that these things must
be accomplished thus, and that even they bear them who cry out "O
Cithaeron." And, indeed, some things are said well by the dramatic
writers, of which kind is the following especially:- 

Me and my children if the gods neglect, 
This has its reason too. And again- 

We must not chale and fret at that which happens. And 

Life's harvest reap like the wheat's fruitful ear. And other things
of the same kind. 

After tragedy the old comedy was introduced, which had a magisterial
freedom of speech, and by its very plainness of speaking was useful
in reminding men to beware of insolence; and for this purpose too
Diogenes used to take from these writers. 

But as to the middle comedy which came next, observe what it was,
and again, for what object the new comedy was introduced, which gradually
sunk down into a mere mimic artifice. That some good things are said
even by these writers, everybody knows: but the whole plan of such
poetry and dramaturgy, to what end does it look! 

How plain does it appear that there is not another condition of life
so well suited for philosophising as this in which thou now happenest
to be. 

A branch cut off from the adjacent branch must of necessity be cut
off from the whole tree also. So too a man when he is separated from
another man has fallen off from the whole social community. Now as
to a branch, another cuts it off, but a man by his own act separates
himself from his neighbour when he hates him and turns away from him,
and he does not know that he has at the same time cut himself off
from the whole social system. Yet he has this privilege certainly
from Zeus who framed society, for it is in our power to grow again
to that which is near to us, and be to come a part which helps to
make up the whole. However, if it often happens, this kind of separation,
it makes it difficult for that which detaches itself to be brought
to unity and to be restored to its former condition. Finally, the
branch, which from the first grew together with the tree, and has
continued to have one life with it, is not like that which after being
cut off is then ingrafted, for this is something like what the gardeners
mean when they say that it grows with the rest of the tree, but that
it has not the same mind with it. 

As those who try to stand in thy way when thou art proceeding according
to right reason, will not be able to turn thee aside from thy proper
action, so neither let them drive thee from thy benevolent feelings
towards them, but be on thy guard equally in both matters, not only
in the matter of steady judgement and action, but also in the matter
of gentleness towards those who try to hinder or otherwise trouble
thee. For this also is a weakness, to be vexed at them, as well as
to be diverted from thy course of action and to give way through fear;
for both are equally deserters from their post, the man who does it
through fear, and the man who is alienated from him who is by nature
a kinsman and a friend. 

There is no nature which is inferior to art, for the arts imitate
the nature of things. But if this is so, that nature which is the
most perfect and the most comprehensive of all natures, cannot fall
short of the skill of art. Now all arts do the inferior things for
the sake of the superior; therefore the universal nature does so too.
And, indeed, hence is the origin of justice, and in justice the other
virtues have their foundation: for justice will not be observed, if
we either care for middle things (things indifferent), or are easily
deceived and careless and changeable. 

If the things do not come to thee, the pursuits and avoidances of
which disturb thee, still in a manner thou goest to them. Let then
thy judgement about them be at rest, and they will remain quiet, and
thou wilt not be seen either pursuing or avoiding. 

The spherical form of the soul maintains its figure, when it is neither
extended towards any object, nor contracted inwards, nor dispersed
nor sinks down, but is illuminated by light, by which it sees the
truth, the truth of all things and the truth that is in itself.

Suppose any man shall despise me. Let him look to that himself. But
I will look to this, that I be not discovered doing or saying anything
deserving of contempt. Shall any man hate me? Let him look to it.
But I will be mild and benevolent towards every man, and ready to
show even him his mistake, not reproachfully, nor yet as making a
display of my endurance, but nobly and honestly, like the great Phocion,
unless indeed he only assumed it. For the interior parts ought to
be such, and a man ought to be seen by the gods neither dissatisfied
with anything nor complaining. For what evil is it to thee, if thou
art now doing what is agreeable to thy own nature, and art satisfied
with that which at this moment is suitable to the nature of the universe,
since thou art a human being placed at thy post in order that what
is for the common advantage may be done in some way? 

Men despise one another and flatter one another; and men wish to raise
themselves above one another, and crouch before one another.

How unsound and insincere is he who says, I have determined to deal
with thee in a fair way.- What art thou doing, man? There is no occasion
to give this notice. It will soon show itself by acts. The voice ought
to be plainly written on the forehead. Such as a man's character is,
he immediately shows it in his eyes, just as he who is beloved forthwith
reads everything in the eyes of lovers. The man who is honest and
good ought to be exactly like a man who smells strong, so that the
bystander as soon as he comes near him must smell whether he choose
or not. But the affectation of simplicity is like a crooked stick.
Nothing is more disgraceful than a wolfish friendship (false friendship).
Avoid this most of all. The good and simple and benevolent show all
these things in the eyes, and there is no mistaking. 

As to living in the best way, this power is in the soul, if it be
indifferent to things which are indifferent. And it will be indifferent,
if it looks on each of these things separately and all together, and
if it remembers that not one of them produces in us an opinion about
itself, nor comes to us; but these things remain immovable, and it
is we ourselves who produce the judgements about them, and, as we
may say, write them in ourselves, it being in our power not to write
them, and it being in our power, if perchance these judgements have
imperceptibly got admission to our minds, to wipe them out; and if
we remember also that such attention will only be for a short time,
and then life will be at an end. Besides, what trouble is there at
all in doing this? For if these things are according to nature, rejoice
in them, and they will be easy to thee: but if contrary to nature,
seek what is conformable to thy own nature, and strive towards this,
even if it bring no reputation; for every man is allowed to seek his
own good. 

Consider whence each thing is come, and of what it consists, and into
what it changes, and what kind of a thing it will be when it has changed,
and that it will sustain no harm. 

If any have offended against thee, consider first: What is my relation
to men, and that we are made for one another; and in another respect,
I was made to be set over them, as a ram over the flock or a bull
over the herd. But examine the matter from first principles, from
this: If all things are not mere atoms, it is nature which orders
all things: if this is so, the inferior things exist for the sake
of the superior, and these for the sake of one another. 

Second, consider what kind of men they are at table, in bed, and so
forth: and particularly, under what compulsions in respect of opinions
they are; and as to their acts, consider with what pride they do what
they do. 

Third, that if men do rightly what they do, we ought not to be displeased;
but if they do not right, it is plain that they do so involuntarily
and in ignorance. For as every soul is unwillingly deprived of the
truth, so also is it unwillingly deprived of the power of behaving
to each man according to his deserts. Accordingly men are pained when
they are called unjust, ungrateful, and greedy, and in a word wrong-doers
to their neighbours. 

Fourth, consider that thou also doest many things wrong, and that
thou art a man like others; and even if thou dost abstain from certain
faults, still thou hast the disposition to commit them, though either
through cowardice, or concern about reputation, or some such mean
motive, thou dost abstain from such faults. 

Fifth, consider that thou dost not even understand whether men are
doing wrong or not, for many things are done with a certain reference
to circumstances. And in short, a man must learn a great deal to enable
him to pass a correct judgement on another man's acts. 

Sixth, consider when thou art much vexed or grieved, that man's life
is only a moment, and after a short time we are all laid out dead.

Seventh, that it is not men's acts which disturb us, for those acts
have their foundation in men's ruling principles, but it is our own
opinions which disturb us. Take away these opinions then, and resolve
to dismiss thy judgement about an act as if it were something grievous,
and thy anger is gone. How then shall I take away these opinions?
By reflecting that no wrongful act of another brings shame on thee:
for unless that which is shameful is alone bad, thou also must of
necessity do many things wrong, and become a robber and everything
else. 

Eighth, consider how much more pain is brought on us by the anger
and vexation caused by such acts than by the acts themselves, at which
we are angry and vexed. 

Ninth, consider that a good disposition is invincible, if it be genuine,
and not an affected smile and acting a part. For what will the most
violent man do to thee, if thou continuest to be of a kind disposition
towards him, and if, as opportunity offers, thou gently admonishest
him and calmly correctest his errors at the very time when he is trying
to do thee harm, saying, Not so, my child: we are constituted by nature
for something else: I shall certainly not be injured, but thou art
injuring thyself, my child.- And show him with gentle tact and by
general principles that this is so, and that even bees do not do as
he does, nor any animals which are formed by nature to be gregarious.
And thou must do this neither with any double meaning nor in the way
of reproach, but affectionately and without any rancour in thy soul;
and not as if thou wert lecturing him, nor yet that any bystander
may admire, but either when he is alone, and if others are present...

Remember these nine rules, as if thou hadst received them as a gift
from the Muses, and begin at last to be a man while thou livest. But
thou must equally avoid flattering men and being veied at them, for
both are unsocial and lead to harm. And let this truth be present
to thee in the excitement of anger, that to be moved by passion is
not manly, but that mildness and gentleness, as they are more agreeable
to human nature, so also are they more manly; and he who possesses
these qualities possesses strength, nerves and courage, and not the
man who is subject to fits of passion and discontent. For in the same
degree in which a man's mind is nearer to freedom from all passion,
in the same degree also is it nearer to strength: and as the sense
of pain is a characteristic of weakness, so also is anger. For he
who yields to pain and he who yields to anger, both are wounded and
both submit. 

But if thou wilt, receive also a tenth present from the leader of
the Muses (Apollo), and it is this- that to expect bad men not to
do wrong is madness, for he who expects this desires an impossibility.
But to allow men to behave so to others, and to expect them not to
do thee any wrong, is irrational and tyrannical. 

There are four principal aberrations of the superior faculty against
which thou shouldst be constantly on thy guard, and when thou hast
detected them, thou shouldst wipe them out and say on each occasion
thus: this thought is not necessary: this tends to destroy social
union: this which thou art going to say comes not from the real thoughts;
for thou shouldst consider it among the most absurd of things for
a man not to speak from his real thoughts. But the fourth is when
thou shalt reproach thyself for anything, for this is an evidence
of the diviner part within thee being overpowered and yielding to
the less honourable and to the perishable part, the body, and to its
gross pleasures. 

Thy aerial part and all the fiery parts which are mingled in thee,
though by nature they have an upward tendency, still in obedience
to the disposition of the universe they are overpowered here in the
compound mass (the body). And also the whole of the earthy part in
thee and the watery, though their tendency is downward, still are
raised up and occupy a position which is not their natural one. In
this manner then the elemental parts obey the universal, for when
they have been fixed in any place perforce they remain there until
again the universal shall sound the signal for dissolution. Is it
not then strange that thy intelligent part only should be disobedient
and discontented with its own place? And yet no force is imposed on
it, but only those things which are conformable to its nature: still
it does not submit, but is carried in the opposite direction. For
the movement towards injustice and intemperance and to anger and grief
and fear is nothing else than the act of one who deviates from nature.
And also when the ruling faculty is discontented with anything that
happens, then too it deserts its post: for it is constituted for piety
and reverence towards the gods no less than for justice. For these
qualities also are comprehended under the generic term of contentment
with the constitution of things, and indeed they are prior to acts
of justice. 

He who has not one and always the same object in life, cannot be one
and the same all through his life. But what I have said is not enough,
unless this also is added, what this object ought to be. For as there
is not the same opinion about all the things which in some way or
other are considered by the majority to be good, but only about some
certain things, that is, things which concern the common interest;
so also ought we to propose to ourselves an object which shall be
of a common kind (social) and political. For he who directs all his
own efforts to this object, will make all his acts alike, and thus
will always be the same. 

Think of the country mouse and of the town mouse, and of the alarm
and trepidation of the town mouse. 

Socrates used to call the opinions of the many by the name of Lamiae,
bugbears to frighten children. 

The Lacedaemonians at their public spectacles used to set seats in
the shade for strangers, but themselves sat down anywhere.

Socrates excused himself to Perdiccas for not going to him, saying,
It is because I would not perish by the worst of all ends, that is,
I would not receive a favour and then be unable to return it.

In the writings of the Ephesians there was this precept, constantly
to think of some one of the men of former times who practised virtue.

The Pythagoreans bid us in the morning look to the heavens that we
may be reminded of those bodies which continually do the same things
and in the same manner perform their work, and also be reminded of
their purity and nudity. For there is no veil over a star.

Consider what a man Socrates was when he dressed himself in a skin,
after Xanthippe had taken his cloak and gone out, and what Socrates
said to his friends who were ashamed of him and drew back from him
when they saw him dressed thus. 

Neither in writing nor in reading wilt thou be able to lay down rules
for others before thou shalt have first learned to obey rules thyself.
Much more is this so in life. 

A slave thou art: free speech is not for thee. 
And my heart laughed within. 
And virtue they will curse, speaking harsh words. 
To look for the fig in winter is a madman's act: such is he who looks
for his child when it is no longer allowed. 

When a man kisses his child, said Epictetus, he should whisper to
himself, "To-morrow perchance thou wilt die."- But those are words
of bad omen.- "No word is a word of bad omen," said Epictetus, "which
expresses any work of nature; or if it is so, it is also a word of
bad omen to speak of the ears of corn being reaped." 

The unripe grape, the ripe bunch, the dried grape, all are changes,
not into nothing, but into something which exists not yet.

No man can rob us of our free will. 
Epictetus also said, A man must discover an art (or rules) with respect
to giving his assent; and in respect to his movements he must be careful
that they be made with regard to circumstances, that they be consistent
with social interests, that they have regard to the value of the object;
and as to sensual desire, he should altogether keep away from it;
and as to avoidance (aversion) he should not show it with respect
to any of the things which are not in our power. 

The dispute then, he said, is not about any common matter, but about
being mad or not. 

Socrates used to say, What do you want? Souls of rational men or irrational?-
Souls of rational men.- Of what rational men? Sound or unsound?- Sound.-
Why then do you not seek for them?- Because we have them.- Why then
do you fight and quarrel? 


All those things at which thou wishest to arrive by a circuitous
road, thou canst have now, if thou dost not refuse them to thyself.
And this means, if thou wilt take no notice of all the past, and trust
the future to providence, and direct the present only conformably
to piety and justice. Conformably to piety, that thou mayest be content
with the lot which is assigned to thee, for nature designed it for
thee and thee for it. Conformably to justice, that thou mayest always
speak the truth freely and without disguise, and do the things which
are agreeable to law and according to the worth of each. And let neither
another man's wickedness hinder thee, nor opinion nor voice, nor yet
the sensations of the poor flesh which has grown about thee; for the
passive part will look to this. If then, whatever the time may be
when thou shalt be near to thy departure, neglecting everything else
thou shalt respect only thy ruling faculty and the divinity within
thee, and if thou shalt be afraid not because thou must some time
cease to live, but if thou shalt fear never to have begun to live
according to nature- then thou wilt be a man worthy of the universe
which has produced thee, and thou wilt cease to be a stranger in thy
native land, and to wonder at things which happen daily as if they
were something unexpected, and to be dependent on this or that.

God sees the minds (ruling principles) of all men bared of the material
vesture and rind and impurities. For with his intellectual part alone
he touches the intelligence only which has flowed and been derived
from himself into these bodies. And if thou also usest thyself to
do this, thou wilt rid thyself of thy much trouble. For he who regards
not the poor flesh which envelops him, surely will not trouble himself
by looking after raiment and dwelling and fame and such like externals
and show. 

The things are three of which thou art composed, a little body, a
little breath (life), intelligence. Of these the first two are thine,
so far as it is thy duty to take care of them; but the third alone
is properly thine. Therefore if thou shalt separate from thyself,
that is, from thy understanding, whatever others do or say, and whatever
thou hast done or said thyself, and whatever future things trouble
thee because they may happen, and whatever in the body which envelops
thee or in the breath (life), which is by nature associated with the
body, is attached to thee independent of thy will, and whatever the
external circumfluent vortex whirls round, so that the intellectual
power exempt from the things of fate can live pure and free by itself,
doing what is just and accepting what happens and saying the truth:
if thou wilt separate, I say, from this ruling faculty the things
which are attached to it by the impressions of sense, and the things
of time to come and of time that is past, and wilt make thyself like
Empedocles' sphere, 

All round, and in its joyous rest reposing; and if thou shalt strive
to live only what is really thy life, that is, the present- then thou
wilt be able to pass that portion of life which remains for thee up
to the time of thy death, free from perturbations, nobly, and obedient
to thy own daemon (to the god that is within thee). 

I have often wondered how it is that every man loves himself more
than all the rest of men, but yet sets less value on his own opinion
of himself than on the opinion of others. If then a god or a wise
teacher should present himself to a man and bid him to think of nothing
and to design nothing which he would not express as soon as he conceived
it, he could not endure it even for a single day. So much more respect
have we to what our neighbours shall think of us than to what we shall
think of ourselves. 

How can it be that the gods after having arranged all things well
and benevolently for mankind, have overlooked this alone, that some
men and very good men, and men who, as we may say, have had most communion
with the divinity, and through pious acts and religious observances
have been most intimate with the divinity, when they have once died
should never exist again, but should be completely extinguished?

But if this is so, be assured that if it ought to have been otherwise,
the gods would have done it. For if it were just, it would also be
possible; and if it were according to nature, nature would have had
it so. But because it is not so, if in fact it is not so, be thou
convinced that it ought not to have been so:- for thou seest even
of thyself that in this inquiry thou art disputing with the diety;
and we should not thus dispute with the gods, unless they were most
excellent and most just;- but if this is so, they would not have allowed
anything in the ordering of the universe to be neglected unjustly
and irrationally. 

Practise thyself even in the things which thou despairest of accomplishing.
For even the left hand, which is ineffectual for all other things
for want of practice, holds the bridle more vigorously than the right
hand; for it has been practised in this. 

Consider in what condition both in body and soul a man should be when
he is overtaken by death; and consider the shortness of life, the
boundless abyss of time past and future, the feebleness of all matter.

Contemplate the formative principles (forms) of things bare of their
coverings; the purposes of actions; consider what pain is, what pleasure
is, and death, and fame; who is to himself the cause of his uneasiness;
how no man is hindered by another; that everything is opinion.

In the application of thy principles thou must be like the pancratiast,
not like the gladiator; for the gladiator lets fall the sword which
he uses and is killed; but the other always has his hand, and needs
to do nothing else than use it. 

See what things are in themselves, dividing them into matter, form
and purpose. 

What a power man has to do nothing except what God will approve, and
to accept all that God may give him. 

With respect to that which happens conformably to nature, we ought
to blame neither gods, for they do nothing wrong either voluntarily
or involuntarily, nor men, for they do nothing wrong except involuntarily.
Consequently we should blame nobody. 

How ridiculous and what a stranger he is who is surprised at anything
which happens in life. 

Either there is a fatal necessity and invincible order, or a kind
Providence, or a confusion without a purpose and without a director
(Book IV). If then there is an invincible necessity, why dost thou
resist? But if there is a Providence which allows itself to be propitiated,
make thyself worthy of the help of the divinity. But if there is a
confusion without governor, be content that in such a tempest thou
hast in thyself a certain ruling intelligence. And even if the tempest
carry thee away, let it carry away the poor flesh, the poor breath,
everything else; for the intelligence at least it will not carry away.

Does the light of the lamp shine without losing its splendour until
it is extinguished; and shall the truth which is in thee and justice
and temperance be extinguished before thy death? 

When a man has presented the appearance of having done wrong, say,
How then do I know if this is a wrongful act? And even if he has done
wrong, how do I know that he has not condemned himself? and so this
is like tearing his own face. Consider that he, who would not have
the bad man do wrong, is like the man who would not have the fig-tree
to bear juice in the figs and infants to cry and the horse to neigh,
and whatever else must of necessity be. For what must a man do who
has such a character? If then thou art irritable, cure this man's
disposition. 

If it is not right, do not do it: if it is not true, do not say it.
For let thy efforts be- 

In everything always observe what the thing is which produces for
thee an appearance, and resolve it by dividing it into the formal,
the material, the purpose, and the time within which it must end.

Perceive at last that thou hast in thee something better and more
divine than the things which cause the various affects, and as it
were pull thee by the strings. What is there now in my mind? Is it
fear, or suspicion, or desire, or anything of the kind? 

First, do nothing inconsiderately, nor without a purpose. Second,
make thy acts refer to nothing else than to a social end.

Consider that before long thou wilt be nobody and nowhere, nor will
any of the things exist which thou now seest, nor any of those who
are now living. For all things are formed by nature to change and
be turned and to perish in order that other things in continuous succession
may exist. 

Consider that everything is opinion, and opinion is in thy power.
Take away then, when thou choosest, thy opinion, and like a mariner,
who has doubled the promontory, thou wilt find calm, everything stable,
and a waveless bay. 

Any one activity whatever it may be, when it has ceased at its proper
time, suffers no evil because it has ceased; nor he who has done this
act, does he suffer any evil for this reason that the act has ceased.
In like manner then the whole which consists of all the acts, which
is our life, if it cease at its proper time, suffers no evil for this
reason that it has ceased; nor he who has terminated this series at
the proper time, has he been ill dealt with. But the proper time and
the limit nature fixes, sometimes as in old age the peculiar nature
of man, but always the universal nature, by the change of whose parts
the whole universe continues ever young and perfect. And everything
which is useful to the universal is always good and in season. Therefore
the termination of life for every man is no evil, because neither
is it shameful, since it is both independent of the will and not opposed
to the general interest, but it is good, since it is seasonable and
profitable to and congruent with the universal. For thus too he is
moved by the deity who is moved in the same manner with the deity
and moved towards the same things in his mind. 

These three principles thou must have in readiness. In the things
which thou doest do nothing either inconsiderately or otherwise than
as justice herself would act; but with respect to what may happen
to thee from without, consider that it happens either by chance or
according to Providence, and thou must neither blame chance nor accuse
Providence. Second, consider what every being is from the seed to
the time of its receiving a soul, and from the reception of a soul
to the giving back of the same, and of what things every being is
compounded and into what things it is resolved. Third, if thou shouldst
suddenly be raised up above the earth, and shouldst look down on human
things, and observe the variety of them how great it is, and at the
same time also shouldst see at a glance how great is the number of
beings who dwell around in the air and the aether, consider that as
often as thou shouldst be raised up, thou wouldst see the same things,
sameness of form and shortness of duration. Are these things to be
proud of? 

Cast away opinion: thou art saved. Who then hinders thee from casting
it away? 

When thou art troubled about anything, thou hast forgotten this, that
all things happen according to the universal nature; and forgotten
this, that a man's wrongful act is nothing to thee; and further thou
hast forgotten this, that everything which happens, always happened
so and will happen so, and now happens so everywhere; forgotten this
too, how close is the kinship between a man and the whole human race,
for it is a community, not of a little blood or seed, but of intelligence.
And thou hast forgotten this too, that every man's intelligence is
a god, and is an efflux of the deity; and forgotten this, that nothing
is a man's own, but that his child and his body and his very soul
came from the deity; forgotten this, that everything is opinion; and
lastly thou hast forgotten that every man lives the present time only,
and loses only this. 

Constantly bring to thy recollection those who have complained greatly
about anything, those who have been most conspicuous by the greatest
fame or misfortunes or enmities or fortunes of any kind: then think
where are they all now? Smoke and ash and a tale, or not even a tale.
And let there be present to thy mind also everything of this sort,
how Fabius Catullinus lived in the country, and Lucius Lupus in his
gardens, and Stertinius at Baiae, and Tiberius at Capreae and Velius
Rufus (or Rufus at Velia); and in fine think of the eager pursuit
of anything conjoined with pride; and how worthless everything is
after which men violently strain; and how much more philosophical
it is for a man in the opportunities presented to him to show


Of the things which are in our Power, and not in our Power

Of all the faculties, you will find not one which is capable of contemplating
itself; and, consequently, not capable either of approving or disapproving.
How far does the grammatic art possess the contemplating power? As
far as forming a judgement about what is written and spoken. And how
far music? As far as judging about melody. Does either of them then
contemplate itself? By no means. But when you must write something
to your friend, grammar will tell you what words you must write; but
whether you should write or not, grammar will not tell you. And so
it is with music as to musical sounds; but whether you should sing
at the present time and play on the lute, or do neither, music will
not tell you. What faculty then will tell you? That which contemplates
both itself and all other things. And what is this faculty? The rational
faculty; for this is the only faculty that we have received which
examines itself, what it is, and what power it has, and what is the
value of this gift, and examines all other faculties: for what else
is there which tells us that golden things are beautiful, for they
do not say so themselves? Evidently it is the faculty which is capable
of judging of appearances. What else judges of music, grammar, and
other faculties, proves their uses and points out the occasions for
using them? Nothing else. 

As then it was fit to be so, that which is best of all and supreme
over all is the only thing which the gods have placed in our power,
the right use of appearances; but all other things they have not placed
in our power. Was it because they did not choose? I indeed think that,
if they had been able, they would have put these other things also
in our power, but they certainly could not. For as we exist on the
earth, and are bound to such a body and to such companions, how was
it possible for us not to be hindered as to these things by externals?

But what says Zeus? "Epictetus, if it were possible, I would have
made both your little body and your little property free and not exposed
to hindrance. But now be not ignorant of this: this body is not yours,
but it is clay finely tempered. And since I was not able to do for
you what I have mentioned, I have given you a small portion of us,
this faculty of pursuing an object and avoiding it, and the faculty
of desire and aversion, and, in a word, the faculty of using the appearances
of things; and if you will take care of this faculty and consider
it your only possession, you will never be hindered, never meet with
impediments; you will not lament, you will not blame, you will not
flatter any person." 

"Well, do these seem to you small matters?" I hope not. "Be content
with them then and pray to the gods." But now when it is in our power
to look after one thing, and to attach ourselves to it, we prefer
to look after many things, and to be bound to many things, to the
body and to property, and to brother and to friend, and to child and
to slave. Since, then, we are bound to many things, we are depressed
by them and dragged down. For this reason, when the weather is not
fit for sailing, we sit down and torment ourselves, and continually
look out to see what wind is blowing. "It is north." What is that
to us? "When will the west wind blow?" When it shall choose, my good
man, or when it shall please AEolus; for God has not made you the
manager of the winds, but AEolus. What then? We must make the best
use that we can of the things which are in our power, and use the
rest according to their nature. What is their nature then? As God
may please. 

"Must I, then, alone have my head cut off?" What, would you have all
men lose their heads that you may be consoled? Will you not stretch
out your neck as Lateranus did at Rome when Nero ordered him to be
beheaded? For when he had stretched out his neck, and received a feeble
blow, which made him draw it in for a moment, he stretched it out
again. And a little before, when he was visited by Epaphroditus, Nero's
freedman, who asked him about the cause of offense which he had given,
he said, "If I choose to tell anything, I will tell your master."

What then should a man have in readiness in such circumstances? What
else than "What is mine, and what is not mine; and permitted to me,
and what is not permitted to me." I must die. Must I then die lamenting?
I must be put in chains. Must I then also lament? I must go into exile.
Does any man then hinder me from going with smiles and cheerfulness
and contentment? "Tell me the secret which you possess." I will not,
for this is in my power. "But I will put you in chains." Man, what
are you talking about? Me in chains? You may fetter my leg, but my
will not even Zeus himself can overpower. "I will throw you into prison."
My poor body, you mean. "I will cut your head off." When, then, have
I told you that my head alone cannot be cut off? These are the things
which philosophers should meditate on, which they should write daily,
in which they should exercise themselves. 

Thrasea used to say, "I would rather be killed to-day than banished
to-morrow." What, then, did Rufus say to him? "If you choose death
as the heavier misfortune, how great is the folly of your choice?
But if, as the lighter, who has given you the choice? Will you not
study to be content with that which has been given to you?"

What, then, did Agrippinus say? He said, "I am not a hindrance to
myself." When it was reported to him that his trial was going on in
the Senate, he said, "I hope it may turn out well; but it is the fifth
hour of the day"- this was the time when he was used to exercise himself
and then take the cold bath- "let us go and take our exercise." After
he had taken his exercise, one comes and tells him, "You have been
condemned." "To banishment," he replies, "or to death?" "To banishment."
"What about my property?" "It is not taken from you." "Let us go to
Aricia then," he said, "and dine." 

This it is to have studied what a man ought to study; to have made
desire, aversion, free from hindrance, and free from all that a man
would avoid. I must die. If now, I am ready to die. If, after a short
time, I now dine because it is the dinner-hour; after this I will
then die. How? Like a man who gives up what belongs to another.

How a Man on every occasion can maintain his Proper Character

To the rational animal only is the irrational intolerable; but that
which is rational is tolerable. Blows are not naturally intolerable.
"How is that?" See how the Lacedaemonians endure whipping when they
have learned that whipping is consistent with reason. "To hang yourself
is not intolerable." When, then, you have the opinion that it is rational,
you go and hang yourself. In short, if we observe, we shall find that
the animal man is pained by nothing so much as by that which is irrational;
and, on the contrary, attracted to nothing so much as to that which
is rational. 

But the rational and the irrational appear such in a different way
to different persons, just as the good and the bad, the profitable
and the unprofitable. For this reason, particularly, we need discipline,
in order to learn how to adapt the preconception of the rational and
the irrational to the several things conformably to nature. But in
order to determine the rational and the irrational, we use not only
the of external things, but we consider also what is appropriate to
each person. For to one man it is consistent with reason to hold a
chamber pot for another, and to look to this only, that if he does
not hold it, he will receive stripes, and he will not receive his
food: but if he shall hold the pot, he will not suffer anything hard
or disagreeable. But to another man not only does the holding of a
chamber pot appear intolerable for himself, but intolerable also for
him to allow another to do this office for him. If, then, you ask
me whether you should hold the chamber pot or not, I shall say to
you that the receiving of food is worth more than the not receiving
of it, and the being scourged is a greater indignity than not being
scourged; so that if you measure your interests by these things, go
and hold the chamber pot. "But this," you say, "would not be worthy
of me." Well, then, it is you who must introduce this consideration
into the inquiry, not I; for it is you who know yourself, how much
you are worth to yourself, and at what price you sell yourself; for
men sell themselves at various prices. 

For this reason, when Florus was deliberating whether he should go
down to Nero's spectacles and also perform in them himself, Agrippinus
said to him, "Go down": and when Florus asked Agrippinus, "Why do
not you go down?" Agrippinus replied, "Because I do not even deliberate
about the matter." For he who has once brought himself to deliberate
about such matters, and to calculate the value of external things,
comes very near to those who have forgotten their own character. For
why do you ask me the question, whether death is preferable or life?
I say "life." "Pain or pleasure?" I say "pleasure." But if I do not
take a part in the tragic acting, I shall have my head struck off.
Go then and take a part, but I will not. "Why?" Because you consider
yourself to be only one thread of those which are in the tunic. Well
then it was fitting for you to take care how you should be like the
rest of men, just as the thread has no design to be anything superior
to the other threads. But I wish to be purple, that small part which
is bright, and makes all the rest appear graceful and beautiful. Why
then do you tell me to make myself like the many? and if I do, how
shall I still be purple? 

Priscus Helvidius also saw this, and acted conformably. For when Vespasian
sent and commanded him not to go into the senate, he replied, "It
is in your power not to allow me to be a member of the senate, but
so long as I am, I must go in." "Well, go in then," says the emperor,
"but say nothing." "Do not ask my opinion, and I will be silent."
"But I must ask your opinion." "And I must say what I think right."
"But if you do, I shall put you to death." "When then did I tell you
that I am immortal? You will do your part, and I will do mine: it
is your part to kill; it is mine to die, but not in fear: yours to
banish me; mine to depart without sorrow." 

What good then did Priscus do, who was only a single person? And what
good does the purple do for the toga? Why, what else than this, that
it is conspicuous in the toga as purple, and is displayed also as
a fine example to all other things? But in such circumstances another
would have replied to Caesar who forbade him to enter the senate,
"I thank you for sparing me." But such a man Vespasian would not even
have forbidden to enter the senate, for he knew that he would either
sit there like an earthen vessel, or, if he spoke, he would say what
Caesar wished, and add even more. 

In this way an athlete also acted who was in danger of dying unless
his private parts were amputated. His brother came to the athlete,
who was a philosopher, and said, "Come, brother, what are you going
to do? Shall we amputate this member and return to the gymnasium?"
But the athlete persisted in his resolution and died. When some one
asked Epictetus how he did this, as an athlete or a philosopher, "As
a man," Epictetus replied, "and a man who had been proclaimed among
the athletes at the Olympic games and had contended in them, a man
who had been familiar with such a place, and not merely anointed in
Baton's school. Another would have allowed even his head to be cut
off, if he could have lived without it. Such is that regard to character
which is so strong in those who have been accustomed to introduce
it of themselves and conjoined with other things into their deliberations."

"Come, then, Epictetus, shave yourself." "If I am a philosopher,"
I answer, "I will not shave myself." "But I will take off your head?"
If that will do you any good, take it off. 

Some person asked, "How then shall every man among us perceive what
is suitable to his character?" How, he replied, does the bull alone,
when the lion has attacked, discover his own powers and put himself
forward in defense of the whole herd? It is plain that with the powers
the perception of having them is immediately conjoined; and, therefore,
whoever of us has such powers will not be ignorant of them. Now a
bull is not made suddenly, nor a brave man; but we must discipline
ourselves in the winter for the summer campaign, and not rashly run
upon that which does not concern us. 

Only consider at what price you sell your own will; if for no other
reason, at least for this, that you sell it not for a small sum. But
that which is great and superior perhaps belongs to Socrates and such
as are like him. "Why then, if we are naturally such, are not a very
great number of us like him?" Is it true then that all horses become
swift, that all dogs are skilled in tracking footprints? "What, then,
since I am naturally dull, shall I, for this reason, take no pains?"
I hope not. Epictetus is not superior to Socrates; but if he is not
inferior, this is enough for me; for I shall never be a Milo, and
yet I do not neglect my body; nor shall I be a Croesus, and yet I
do not neglect my property; nor, in a word, do we neglect looking
after anything because we despair of reaching the highest degree.


How a man should proceed from the principle of God being the father
of all men to the rest 

If a man should be able to assent to this doctrine as he ought, that
we are all sprung from God in an especial manner, and that God is
the father both of men and of gods, I suppose that he would never
have any ignoble or mean thoughts about himself. But if Caesar should
adopt you, no one could endure your arrogance; and if you know that
you are the son of Zeus, will you not be elated? Yet we do not so;
but since these two things are mingled in the generation of man, body
in common with the animals, and reason and intelligence in common
with the gods, many incline to this kinship, which is miserable and
mortal; and some few to that which is divine and happy. Since then
it is of necessity that every man uses everything according to the
opinion which he has about it, those, the few, who think that they
are formed for fidelity and modesty and a sure use of appearances
have no mean or ignoble thoughts about themselves; but with the many
it is quite the contrary. For they say, "What am I? A poor, miserable
man, with my wretched bit of flesh." Wretched. Indeed; but you possess
something better than your "bit of flesh." Why then do you neglect
that which is better, and why do you attach yourself to this?

Through this kinship with the flesh, some of us inclining to it become
like wolves, faithless and treacherous and mischievous: some become
like lions, savage and untamed; but the greater part of us become
foxes and other worse animals. For what else is a slanderer and a
malignant man than a fox, or some other more wretched and meaner animal?
See, then, and take care that you do not become some one of these
miserable things. 

He who is making progress, having learned from philosophers that desire
means the desire of good things, and aversion means aversion from
bad things; having learned too that happiness and tranquillity are
not attainable by man otherwise than by not failing to obtain what
he desires, and not falling into that which he would avoid; such a
man takes from himself desire altogether and defers it, but he employs
his aversion only on things which are dependent on his will. For if
he attempts to avoid anything independent of his will, he knows that
sometimes he will fall in with something which he wishes to avoid,
and he will be unhappy. Now if virtue promises good fortune and tranquillity
and happiness, certainly also the progress toward virtue is progress
toward each of these things. For it is always true that to whatever
point the perfecting of anything leads us, progress is an approach
toward this point. 

How then do we admit that virtue is such as I have said, and yet seek
progress in other things and make a display of it? What is the product
of virtue? Tranquillity. Who then makes improvement? It is he who
has read many books of Chrysippus? But does virtue consist in having
understood Chrysippus? If this is so, progress is clearly nothing
else than knowing a great deal of Chrysippus. But now we admit that
virtue produces one thing. and we declare that approaching near to
it is another thing, namely, progress or improvement. "Such a person,"
says one, "is already able to read Chrysippus by himself." Indeed,
sir, you are making great progress. What kind of progress? But why
do you mock the man? Why do you draw him away from the perception
of his own misfortunes? Will you not show him the effect of virtue
that he may learn where to look for improvement? Seek it there, wretch,
where your work lies. And where is your work? In desire and in aversion,
that you may not be disappointed in your desire, and that you may
not fall into that which you would avoid; in your pursuit and avoiding,
that you commit no error; in assent and suspension of assent, that
you be not deceived. The first things, and the most necessary, are
those which I have named. But if with trembling and lamentation you
seek not to fall into that which you avoid, tell me how you are improving.

Do you then show me your improvement in these things? If I were talking
to an athlete, I should say, "Show me your shoulders"; and then he
might say, "Here are my halteres." You and your halteres look to that.
I should reply, "I wish to see the effect of the halteres." So, when
you say: "Take the treatise on the active powers, and see how I have
studied it." I reply, "Slave, I am not inquiring about this, but how
you exercise pursuit and avoidance, desire and aversion, how your
design and purpose and prepare yourself, whether conformably to nature
or not. If conformably, give me evidence of it, and I will say that
you are making progress: but if not conformably, be gone, and not
only expound your books, but write such books yourself; and what will
you gain by it? Do you not know that the whole book costs only five
denarii? Does then the expounder seem to be worth more than five denarii?
Never, then, look for the matter itself in one place, and progress
toward it in another." 

Where then is progress? If any of you, withdrawing himself from externals,
turns to his own will to exercise it and to improve it by labour,
so as to make it conformable to nature, elevated, free, unrestrained,
unimpeded, faithful, modest; and if he has learned that he who desires
or avoids the things which are not in his power can neither be faithful
nor free, but of necessity he must change with them and be tossed
about with them as in a tempest, and of necessity must subject himself
to others who have the power to procure or prevent what he desires
or would avoid; finally, when he rises in the morning, if he observes
and keeps these rules, bathes as a man of fidelity, eats as a modest
man; in like manner, if in every matter that occurs he works out his
chief principles as the runner does with reference to running, and
the trainer of the voice with reference to the voice- this is the
man who truly makes progress, and this is the man who has not traveled
in vain. But if he has strained his efforts to the practice of reading
books, and labours only at this, and has traveled for this, I tell
him to return home immediately, and not to neglect his affairs there;
for this for which he has traveled is nothing. But the other thing
is something, to study how a man can rid his life of lamentation and
groaning, and saying, "Woe to me," and "wretched that I am," and to
rid it also of misfortune and disappointment and to learn what death
is, and exile, and prison, and poison, that he may be able to say
when he is in fetters, "Dear Crito, if it is the will of the gods
that it be so, let it be so"; and not to say, "Wretched am I, an old
man; have I kept my gray hairs for this?" Who is it that speaks thus?
Do you think that I shall name some man of no repute and of low condition?
Does not Priam say this? Does not OEdipus say this? Nay, all kings
say it! For what else is tragedy than the perturbations of men who
value externals exhibited in this kind of poetry? But if a man must
learn by fiction that no external things which are independent of
the will concern us, for this? part I should like this fiction, by
the aid of which I should live happily and undisturbed. But you must
consider for yourselves what you wish. 

What then does Chrysippus teach us? The reply is, "to know that these
things are not false, from which happiness comes and tranquillity
arises. Take my books, and you will learn how true and conformable
to nature are the things which make me free from perturbations." O
great good fortune! O the great benefactor who points out the way!
To Triptolemus all men have erected temples and altars, because he
gave us food by cultivation; but to him who discovered truth and brought
it to light and communicated it to all, not the truth which shows
us how to live, but how to live well, who of you for this reason has
built an altar, or a temple, or has dedicated a statue, or who worships
God for this? Because the gods have given the vine, or wheat, we sacrifice
to them: but because they have produced in the human mind that fruit
by which they designed to show us the truth which relates to happiness,
shall we not thank God for this? 

If a man, said Epictetus, opposes evident truths, it is not easy to
find arguments by which we shall make him change his opinion. But
this does not arise either from the man's strength or the teacher's
weakness; for when the man, though he has been confuted, is hardened
like a stone, how shall we then be able to deal with him by argument?

Now there are two kinds of hardening, one of the understanding, the
other of the sense of shame, when a man is resolved not to assent
to what is manifest nor to desist from contradictions. Most of us
are afraid of mortification of the body, and would contrive all means
to avoid such a thing, but we care not about the soul's mortification.
And indeed with regard to the soul, if a man be in such a state as
not to apprehend anything, or understand at all, we think that he
is in a bad condition: but if the sense of shame and modesty are deadened,
this we call even power. 

Do you comprehend that you are awake? "I do not," the man replies,
"for I do not even comprehend when in my sleep I imagine that I am
awake." Does this appearance then not differ from the other? "Not
at all," he replies. Shall I still argue with this man? And what fire
or what iron shall I apply to him to make him feel that he is deadened?
He does perceive, but he pretends that he does not. He's even worse
than a dead man. He does not see the contradiction: he is in a bad
condition. Another does see it, but he is not moved, and makes no
improvement: he is even in a worse condition. His modesty is extirpated,
and his sense of shame; and the rational faculty has not been cut
off from him, but it is brutalized. Shall I name this strength of
mind? Certainly not, unless we also name it such in catamites, through
which they do and say in public whatever comes into their head.

From everything which is or happens in the world, it is easy to praise
Providence, if a man possesses these two qualities, the faculty of
seeing what belongs and happens to all persons and things, and a grateful
disposition. If he does not possess these two qualities, one man will
not see the use of things which are and which happen; another will
not be thankful for them, even if he does know them. If God had made
colours, but had not made the faculty of seeing them, what would have
been their use? None at all. On the other hand, if He had made the
faculty of vision, but had not made objects such as to fall under
the faculty, what in that case also would have been the use of it?
None at all. Well, suppose that He had made both, but had not made
light? In that case, also, they would have been of no use. Who is
it, then, who has fitted this to that and that to this? And who is
it that has fitted the knife to the case and the case to the knife?
Is it no one? And, indeed, from the very structure of things which
have attained their completion, we are accustomed to show that the
work is certainly the act of some artificer, and that it has not been
constructed without a purpose. Does then each of these things demonstrate
the workman, and do not visible things and the faculty of seeing and
light demonstrate Him? And the existence of male and female, and the
desire of each for conjunction, and the power of using the parts which
are constructed, do not even these declare the workman? If they do
not, let us consider the constitution of our understanding according
to which, when we meet with sensible objects, we simply receive impressions
from them, but we also select something from them, and subtract something,
and add, and compound by means of them these things or those, and,
in fact, pass from some to other things which, in a manner, resemble
them: is not even this sufficient to move some men, and to induce
them not to forget the workman? If not so, let them explain to us
what it is that makes each several thing, or how it is possible that
things so wonderful and like the contrivances of art should exist
by chance and from their own proper motion? 

What, then, are these things done in us only. Many, indeed, in us
only, of which the rational animal had peculiar need; but you will
find many common to us with irrational animals. Do they them understand
what is done? By no means. For use is one thing, and understanding
is another: God had need of irrational animals to make use of appearances,
but of us to understand the use of appearances. It is therefore enough
for them to eat and to drink, and to sleep and to copulate, and to
do all the other things which they severally do. But for us, to whom
He has given also the faculty, these things are not sufficient; for
unless we act in a proper and orderly manner, and conformably to the
nature and constitution of each thing, we shall never attain our true
end. For where the constitutions of living beings are different, there
also the acts and the ends are different. In those animals, then,
whose constitution is adapted only to use, use alone is enough: but
in an animal which has also the power of understanding the use, unless
there be the due exercise of the understanding, he will never attain
his proper end. Well then God constitutes every animal, one to be
eaten, another to serve for agriculture, another to supply cheese,
and another for some like use; for which purposes what need is there
to understand appearances and to be able to distinguish them? But
God has introduced man to be a spectator of God and of His works;
and not only a spectator of them, but an interpreter. For this reason
it is shameful for man to begin and to end where irrational animals
do, but rather he ought to begin where they begin, and to end where
nature ends in us; and nature ends in contemplation and understanding,
in a way of life conformable to nature. Take care then not to die
without having been spectators of these things. 

But you take a journey to Olympia to see the work of Phidias, and
all of you think it a misfortune to die without having seen such things.
But when there is no need to take a journey, and where a man is, there
he has the works (of God) before him, will you not desire to see and
understand them? Will you not perceive either what you are, or what
you were born for, or what this is for which you have received the
faculty of sight? But you may say, "There are some things disagreeable
and troublesome in life." And are there none in Olympia? Are you not
scorched? Are you not pressed by a crowd? Are you not without comfortable
means of bathing? Are you not wet when it rains? Have you not abundance
of noise, clamour, and other disagreeable things? But I suppose that
setting all these things off against the magnificence of the spectacle,
you bear and endure. Well, then, and have you not received faculties
by which you will be able to bear all that happens? Have you not received
greatness of soul? Have you not received manliness? Have you not received
endurance? And why do I trouble myself about anything that can happen
if I possess greatness of soul? What shall distract my mind or disturb
me, or appear painful? Shall I not use the power for the purposes
for which I received it, and shall I grieve and lament over what happens?

"Yes, but my nose runs." For what purpose then, slave, have you hands?
Is it not that you may wipe your nose? "Is it, then, consistent with
reason that there should be running of noses in the world?" Nay, how
much better it is to wipe your nose than to find fault. What do you
think that Hercules would have been if there had not been such a lion,
and hydra, and stag, and boar, and certain unjust and bestial men,
whom Hercules used to drive away and clear out? And what would he
have been doing if there had been nothing of the kind? Is it not plain
that he would have wrapped himself up and have slept? In the first
place, then he would not have been a Hercules, when he was dreaming
away all his life in such luxury and case; and even if he had been
one what would have been the use of him? and what the use of his arms,
and of the strength of the other parts of his body, and his endurance
and noble spirit, if such circumstances and occasions had not roused
and exercised him? "Well, then, must a man provide for himself such
means of exercise, and to introduce a lion from some place into his
country, and a boar and a hydra?" This would be folly and madness:
but as they did exist, and were found, they were useful for showing
what Hercules was and for exercising him. Come then do you also having
observed these things look to the faculties which you have, and when
you have looked at them, say: "Bring now, O Zeus, any difficulty that
Thou pleasest, for I have means given to me by Thee and powers for
honoring myself through the things which happen." You do not so; but
you sit still, trembling for fear that some things will happen, and
weeping, and lamenting and groaning for what does happen: and then
you blame the gods. For what is the consequence of such meanness of
spirit but impiety? And yet God has not only given us these faculties;
by which we shall be able to bear everything that happens without
being depressed or broken by it; but, like a good king and a true
father, He has given us these faculties free from hindrance, subject
to no compulsion unimpeded, and has put them entirely in our own power,
without even having reserved to Himself any power of hindering or
impeding. You, who have received these powers free and as your own,
use them not: you do not even see what you have received, and from
whom; some of you being blinded to the giver, and not even acknowledging
your benefactor, and others, through meanness of spirit, betaking
yourselves to fault finding and making charges against God. Yet I
will show to you that you have powers and means for greatness of soul
and manliness but what powers you have for finding fault and making
accusations, do you show me. 

The handling of sophistical and hypothetical arguments, and of those
which derive their conclusions from questioning, and in a word the
handling of all such arguments, relates to the duties of life, though
the many do not know this truth. For in every matter we inquire how
the wise and good man shall discover the proper path and the proper
method of dealing with the matter. Let, then, people either say that
the grave man will not descend into the contest of question and answer,
or that, if he does descend into the contest, he will take no care
about not conducting himself rashly or carelessly in questioning and
answering. But if they do not allow either the one or the other of
these things, they must admit that some inquiry ought to be made into
those topics on which particularly questioning and answering are employed.
For what is the end proposed in reasoning? To establish true propositions,
to remove the false, to withhold assent from those which are not plain.
Is it enough then to have learned only this? "It is enough," a man
may reply. Is it, then, also enough for a man, who would not make
a mistake in the use of coined money, to have heard this precept,
that he should receive the genuine drachmae and reject the spurious?
"It is not enough." What, then, ought to be added to this precept?
What else than the faculty which proves and distinguishes the genuine
and the spurious drachmae? Consequently also in reasoning what has
been said is not enough; but is it necessary that a man should acquire
the faculty of examining and distinguishing the true and the false,
and that which is not plain? "It is necessary." Besides this, what
is proposed in reasoning? "That you should accept what follows from
that which you have properly granted." Well, is it then enough in
this case also to know this? It is not enough; but a man must learn
how one thing is a consequence of other things, and when one thing
follows from one thing, and when it follows from several collectively.
Consider, then if it be not necessary that this power should also
be acquired by him who purposes to conduct himself skillfully in reasoning,
the power of demonstrating himself the several things which he has
proposed, and the power of understanding the demonstrations of others,
including of not being deceived by sophists, as if they were demonstrating.
Therefore there has arisen among us the practice and exercise of conclusive
arguments and figures, and it has been shown to be necessary.

But in fact in some cases we have properly granted the premisses or
assumptions, and there results from them something; and though it
is not true, yet none the less it does result. What then ought I to
do? Ought I to admit the falsehood? And how is that possible? Well,
should I say that I did not properly grant that which we agreed upon?
"But you are not allowed to do even this." Shall I then say that the
consequence does not arise through what has been conceded? "But neither
is it allowed." What then must be done in this case? Consider if it
is not this: as to have borrowed is not enough to make a man still
a debtor, but to this must be added the fact that he continues to
owe the money and that the debt is not paid, so it is not enough to
compel you to admit the inference that you have granted the premisses,
but you must abide by what you have granted. Indeed, if the premisses
continue to the end such as they were when they were granted, it is
absolutely necessary for us to abide by what we have granted, and
we must accept their consequences: but if the premisses do not remain
such as they were when they were granted, it is absolutely necessary
for us also to withdraw from what we granted, and from accepting what
does not follow from the words in which our concessions were made.
For the inference is now not our inference, nor does it result with
our assent, since we have withdrawn from the premisses which we granted.
We ought then both to examine such kind of premisses, and such change
and variation of them, by which in the course of questioning or answering,
or in making the syllogistic conclusion, or in any other such way,
the premisses undergo variations, and give occasion to the foolish
to be confounded, if they do not see what conclusions are. For what
reason ought we to examine? In order that we may not in this matter
be employed in an improper manner nor in a confused way.

And the same in hypotheses and hypothetical arguments; for it is necessary
sometimes to demand the granting of some hypothesis as a kind of passage
to the argument which follows. Must we then allow every hypothesis
that is proposed, or not allow every one? And if not every one, which
should we allow? And if a man has allowed an hypothesis, must he in
every case abide by allowing it? or must he sometimes withdraw from
it, but admit the consequences and not admit contradictions? Yes;
but suppose that a man says, "If you admit the hypothesis of a possibility,
I will draw you to an impossibility." With such a person shall a man
of sense refuse to enter into a contest, and avoid discussion and
conversation with him? But what other man than the man of sense can
use argumentation and is skillful in questioning and answering, and
incapable of being cheated and deceived by false reasoning? And shall
he enter into the contest, and yet not take care whether he shall
engage in argument not rashly and not carelessly? And if he does not
take care, how can he be such a man as we conceive him to be? But
without some such exercise and preparation, can he maintain a continuous
and consistent argument? Let them show this; and all these speculations
become superfluous, and are absurd and inconsistent with our notion
of a good and serious man. 

Why are we still indolent and negligent and sluggish, and why do we
seek pretences for not labouring and not being watchful in cultivating
our reason? "If then I shall make a mistake in these matters may I
not have killed my father?" Slave, where was there a father in this
matter that you could kill him? What, then, have you done? The only
fault that was possible here is the fault which you have committed.
This is the very remark which I made to Rufus when he blamed me for
not having discovered the one thing omitted in a certain syllogism:
"I suppose," I said, "that I have burnt the Capitol." "Slave," he
replied, "was the thing omitted here the Capitol?" Or are these the
only crimes, to burn the Capitol and to kill your father? But for
a man to use the appearances resented to him rashly and foolishly
and carelessly, not to understand argument, nor demonstration, nor
sophism, nor, in a word, to see in questioning and answering what
is consistent with that which we have granted or is not consistent;
is there no error in this? 


In as many ways as we can change things which are equivalent to one
another, in just so many ways we can change the forms of arguments
and enthymemes in argumentation. This is an instance: "If you have
borrowed and not repaid, you owe me the money: you have not borrowed
and you have not repaid; then you do not owe me the money." To do
this skillfully is suitable to no man more than to the philosopher;
for if the enthymeme is all imperfect syllogism. it is plain that
he who has been exercised in the perfect syllogism must be equally
expert in the imperfect also. 

"Why then do we not exercise ourselves and one another in this manner?"
Because, I reply, at present, though we are not exercised in these
things and not distracted from the study of morality, by me at least,
still we make no progress in virtue. What then must we expect if we
should add this occupation? and particularly as this would not only
be an occupation which would withdraw us from more necessary things,
but would also be a cause of self conceit and arrogance, and no small
cause. For great is the power of arguing and the faculty of persuasion,
and particularly if it should be much exercised, and also receive
additional ornament from language: and so universally, every faculty
acquired by the uninstructed and weak brings with it the danger of
these persons being elated and inflated by it. For by what means could
one persuade a young man who excels in these matters that he ought
not to become an appendage to them, but to make them an appendage
to himself? Does he not trample on all such reasons, and strut before
us elated and inflated, not enduring that any man should reprove him
and remind him of what he has neglected and to what he has turned
aside? 

"What, then, was not Plato a philosopher?" I reply, "And was not Hippocrates
a physician? but you see how Hippocrates speaks." Does Hippocrates,
then, speak thus in respect of being a physician? Why do you mingle
things which have been accidentally united in the same men? And if
Plato was handsome and strong, ought I also to set to work and endeavor
to become handsome or strong, as if this was necessary for philosophy,
because a certain philosopher was at the same time handsome and a
philosopher? Will you not choose to see and to distinguish in respect
to what men become philosophers, and what things belong to belong
to them in other respects? And if I were a philosopher, ought you
also to be made lame? What then? Do I take away these faculties which
you possess? By no means; for neither do I take away the faculty of
seeing. But if you ask me what is the good of man, I cannot mention
to you anything else than that it is a certain disposition of the
will with respect to appearances. 

Chapter 9

How from the fact that we are akin to God a man may proceed to the
consequences 

If the things are true which are said by the philosophers about the
kinship between God and man, what else remains for men to do then
what Socrates did? Never in reply to the question, to what country
you belong, say that you are an Athenian or a Corinthian, but that
you are a citizen of the world. For why do you say that you are an
Athenian, and why do you not say that you belong to the small nook
only into which your poor body was cast at birth? Is it not plain
that you call yourself an Athenian or Corinthian from the place which
has a greater authority and comprises not only that small nook itself
and all your family, but even the whole country from which the stock
of your progenitors is derived down to you? He then who has observed
with intelligence the administration of the world, and has learned
that the greatest and supreme and the most comprehensive community
is that which is composed of men and God, and that from God have descended
the seeds not only to my father and grandfather, but to all beings
which are generated on the earth and are produced, and particularly
to rational beings- for these only are by their nature formed to have
communion with God, being by means of reason conjoined with Him- why
should not such a man call himself a citizen of the world, why not
a son of God, and why should he be afraid of anything which happens
among men? Is kinship with Caesar or with any other of the powerful
in Rome sufficient to enable us to live in safety, and above contempt
and without any fear at all? and to have God for your maker and father
and guardian, shall not this release us from sorrows and fears?

But a man may say, "Whence shall I get bread to eat when I have nothing?"

And how do slaves, and runaways, on what do they rely when they leave
their masters? Do they rely on their lands or slaves, or their vessels
of silver? They rely on nothing but themselves, and food does not
fail them. And shall it be necessary for one among us who is a philosopher
to travel into foreign parts, and trust to and rely on others, and
not to take care of himself, and shall he be inferior to irrational
animals and more cowardly, each of which, being self-sufficient, neither
fails to get its proper food, nor to find a suitable way of living,
and one conformable to nature? 

I indeed think that the old man ought to be sitting here, not to contrive
how you may have no mean thoughts nor mean and ignoble talk about
yourselves, but to take care that there be not among us any young
men of such a mind that, when they have recognized their kinship to
God, and that we are fettered by these bonds, the body, I mean, and
its possessions, and whatever else on account of them is necessary
to us for the economy and commerce of life, they should intend to
throw off these things as if they were burdens painful and intolerable,
and to depart to their kinsmen. But this is the labour that your teacher
and instructor ought to be employed upon, if he really were what he
should be. You should come to him and say, "Epictetus, we can no longer
endure being bound to this poor body, and feeding it and giving it
drink, and rest, and cleaning it, and for the sake of the body complying
with the wishes of these and of those. Are not these things indifferent
and nothing to us, and is not death no evil? And are we not in a manner
kinsmen of God, and did we not come from Him? Allow us to depart to
the place from which we came; allow us to be released at last from
these bonds by which we are bound and weighed down. Here there are
robbers and thieves and courts of justice, and those who are named
tyrants, and think that they have some power over us by means of the
body and its possessions. Permit us to show them that they have no
power over any man." And I on my part would say, "Friends, wait for
God; when He shall give the signal and release you from this service,
then go to Him; but for the present endure to dwell in this place
where He has put you: short indeed is this time of your dwelling here,
and easy to bear for those who are so disposed: for what tyrant or
what thief, or what courts of justice, are formidable to those who
have thus considered as things of no value the body and the possessions
of the body? Wait then, do not depart without a reason."

Something like this ought to be said by the teacher to ingenuous youths.
But now what happens? The teacher is a lifeless body, and you are
lifeless bodies. When you have been well filled to-day, you sit down
and lament about the morrow, how you shall get something to eat. Wretch,
if you have it, you will have it; if you have it not, you will depart
from life. The door is open. Why do you grieve? where does there remain
any room for tears? and where is there occasion for flattery? why
shall one man envy another? why should a man admire the rich or the
powerful, even if they be both very strong and of violent temper?
for what will they do to us? We shall not care for that which they
can do; and what we do care for, that they cannot do. How did Socrates
behave with respect to these matters? Why, in what other way than
a man ought to do who was convinced that he was a kinsman of the gods?
"If you say to me now," said Socrates to his judges, "'We will acquit
you on the condition that you no longer discourse in the way in which
you have hitherto discoursed, nor trouble either our young or our
old men,' I shall answer, 'you make yourselves ridiculous by thinking
that, if one of our commanders has appointed me to a certain post,
it is my duty to keep and maintain it, and to resolve to die a thousand
times rather than desert it; but if God has put us in any place and
way of life, we ought to desert it.'" Socrates speaks like a man who
is really a kinsman of the gods. But we think about ourselves as if
we were only stomachs, and intestines, and shameful parts; we fear,
we desire; we flatter those who are able to help us in these matters,
and we fear them also. 

A man asked me to write to Rome about him, a man who, as most people
thought, had been unfortunate, for formerly he was a man of rank and
rich, but had been stripped of all, and was living here. I wrote on
his behalf in a submissive manner; but when he had read the letter,
he gave it back to me and said, "I wished for your help, not your
pity: no evil has happened to me." 

Thus also Musonius Rufus, in order to try me, used to say: "This and
this will befall you from your master"; and I replied that these were
things which happen in the ordinary course of human affairs. "Why,
then," said he, "should I ask him for anything when I can obtain it
from you?" For, in fact, what a man has from himself, it is superfluous
and foolish to receive from another? Shall I, then, who am able to
receive from myself greatness of soul and a generous spirit, receive
from you land and money or a magisterial office? I hope not: I will
not be so ignorant about my own possessions. But when a man is cowardly
and mean, what else must be done for him than to write letters as
you would about a corpse. "Please to grant us the body of a certain
person and a sextarius of poor blood." For such a person is, in fact,
a carcass and a sextarius of blood, and nothing more. But if he were
anything more, he would know that one man is not miserable through
the means of another. 

If we applied ourselves as busily to our own work as the old men at
Rome do to those matters about which they are employed, perhaps we
also might accomplish something. I am acquainted with a man older
than myself who is now superintendent of corn at Rome, and remember
the time when he came here on his way back from exile, and what he
said as he related the events of his former life, and how he declared
that with respect to the future after his return he would look after
nothing else than passing the rest of his life in quiet and tranquillity.
"For how little of life," he said, remains for me." I replied, "You
will not do it, but as soon as you smell Rome, you will forget all
that you have said; and if admission is allowed even into the imperial
palace, you will gladly thrust yourself in and thank God." "If you
find me, Epictetus," he answered, "setting even one foot within the
palace, think what you please." Well, what then did he do? Before
he entered the city he was met by letters from Caesar, and as soon
as he received them he forgot all, and ever after has added one piece
of business to another. I wish that I were now by his side to remind
him of what he said when he was passing this way and to tell him how
much better a seer I am than he is. 

Well, then, do I say that man is an animal made for doing nothing?
Certainly not. But why are we not active? For example, as to myself,
as soon as day comes, in a few words I remind myself of what I must
read over to my pupils; then forthwith I say to myself, "But what
is it to me how a certain person shall read? the first thing for me
is to sleep." And indeed what resemblance is there between what other
persons do and what we do? If you observe what they do, you will understand.
And what else do they do all day long than make up accounts, inquire
among themselves, give and take advice about some small quantity of
grain, a bit of land, and such kind of profits? Is it then the same
thing to receive a petition and to read in it: "I entreat you to permit
me to export a small quantity of corn"; and one to this effect: "I
entreat you to learn from Chrysippus what is the administration of
the world, and what place in it the rational animal holds; consider
also who you are, and what is the nature of your good and bad." Are
these things like the other, do they require equal care, and is it
equally base to neglect these and those? Well, then, are we the only
persons who are lazy and love sleep? No; but much rather you young
men are. For we old men, when we see young men amusing themselves,
are eager to play with them; and if I saw you active and zealous,
much more should I be eager myself to join you in your serious pursuits

When he was visited by one of the magistrates, Epictetus inquired
of him about several particulars, and asked if he had children and
a wife. The man replied that he had; and Epictetus inquired further,
how he felt under the circumstances. "Miserable," the man said. Then
Epictetus asked, "In what respect," for men do not marry and beget
children in order to be wretched, but rather to be happy. "But I,"
the man replied, "am so wretched about my children that lately, when
my little daughter was sick and was supposed to be in danger, I could
not endure to stay with her, but I left home till a person sent me
news that she had recovered." Well then, said Epictetus, do you think
that you acted right? "I acted naturally," the man replied. But convince
me of this that you acted naturally, and I will convince you that
everything which takes place according to nature takes place rightly.
"This is the case," said the man, "with all or at least most fathers."
I do not deny that: but the matter about which we are inquiring is
whether such behavior is right; for in respect to this matter we must
say that tumours also come for the good of the body, because they
do come; and generally we must say that to do wrong is natural, because
nearly all or at least most of us do wrong. Do you show me then how
your behavior is natural. "I cannot," he said; "but do you rather
show me how it is not according to nature and is not rightly done.

Well, said Epictetus, if we were inquiring about white and black,
what criterion should we employ for distinguishing between them? "The
sight," he said. And if about hot and cold, and hard and soft, what
criterion? "The touch." Well then, since we are inquiring about things
which are according to nature, and those which are done rightly or
not rightly, what kind of criterion do you think that we should employ?
"I do not know," he said. And yet not to know the criterion of colors
and smells, and also of tastes, is perhaps no great harm; but if a
man do not know the criterion of good and bad, and of things according
to nature and contrary to nature, does this seem to you a small harm?
"The greatest harm." Come tell me, do all things which seem to some
persons to be good and becoming rightly appear such; and at present
as to Jews and Syrians and Egyptians and Romans, is it possible that
the opinions of all of them in respect to food are right? "How is
it possible?" he said. Well, I suppose it is absolutely necessary
that, if the opinions of the Egyptians are right, the opinions of
the rest must be wrong: if the opinions of the Jews are right, those
of the rest cannot be right. "Certainly." But where there is ignorance,
there also there is want of learning and training in things which
are necessary. He assented to this. You then, said Epictetus, since
you know this, for the future will employ yourself seriously about
nothing else, and will apply your mind to nothing else than to learn
the criterion of things which are according to nature, and by using
it also to determine each several thing. But in the present matter
I have so much as this to aid you toward what you wish. Does affection
to those of your family appear to you to be according to nature and
to be good? "Certainly." Well, is such affection natural and good,
and is a thing consistent with reason not good? "By no means." Is
then that which is consistent with reason in contradiction with affection?
"I think not." You are right, for if it is otherwise, it is necessary
that one of the contradictions being according to nature, the other
must be contrary to nature. Is it not so? "It is," he said. Whatever,
then, we shall discover to be at the same time affectionate and also
consistent with reason, this we confidently declare to be right and
good. "Agreed." Well then to leave your sick child and to go away
is not reasonable, and I suppose that you will not say that it is;
but it remains for us to inquire if it is consistent with affection.
"Yes, let us consider." Did you, then, since you had an affectionate
disposition to your child, do right when you ran off and left her;
and has the mother no affection for the child? "Certainly, she has."
Ought, then, the mother also to have left her, or ought she not? "She
ought not." And the nurse, does she love her? "She does." Ought, then,
she also to have left her? "By no means." And the pedagogue, does
he not love her? "He does love her." Ought, then, he also to have
deserted her? and so should the child have been left alone and without
help on account of the great affection of you, the parents, and of
those about her, or should she have died in the hands of those who
neither loved her nor cared for her? "Certainly not." Now this is
unfair and unreasonable, not to allow those who have equal affection
with yourself to do what you think to be proper for yourself to do
because you have affection. It is absurd. Come then, if you were sick,
would you wish your relations to be so affectionate, and all the rest,
children and wife, as to leave you alone and deserted? "By no means."
And would you wish to be so loved by your own that through their excessive
affection you would always be left alone in sickness? or for this
reason would you rather pray, if it were possible, to be loved by
your enemies and deserted by them? But if this is so, it results that
your behavior was not at all an affectionate act. 

Well then, was it nothing which moved you and induced you to desert
your child? and how is that possible? But it might be something of
the kind which moved a man at Rome to wrap up his head while a horse
was running which he favoured; and when contrary to expectation the
horse won, he required sponges to recover from his fainting fit. What
then is the thing which moved? The exact discussion of this does not
belong to the present occasion perhaps; but it is enough to be convinced
of this, if what the philosophers say is true, that we must not look
for it anywhere without, but in all cases it is one and the same thing
which is the cause of our doing or not doing something, of saying
or not saying something, of being elated or depressed, of avoiding
anything or pursuing: the very thing which is now the cause to me
and to you, to you of coming to me and sitting and hearing, and to
me of saying what I do say. And what is this? Is it any other than
our will to do so? "No other." But if we had willed otherwise, what
else should we have been doing than that which we willed to do? This,
then, was the cause of Achilles' lamentation, not the death of Patroclus;
for another man does not behave thus on the death of his companion;
but it was because he chose to do so. And to you this was the very
cause of your then running away, that you chose to do so; and on the
other side, if you should stay with her, the reason will be the same.
And now you are going to Rome because you choose; and if you should
change your mind, you will not go thither. And in a word, neither
death nor exile nor pain nor anything of the kind is the cause of
our doing anything or not doing; but our own opinions and our wills.

Do I convince you of this or not? "You do convince me." Such, then,
as the causes are in each case, such also are the effects. When, then,
we are doing anything not rightly, from this day we shall impute it
to nothing else than to the will from which we have done it: and it
is that which we shall endeavour to take away and to extirpate more
than the tumours and abscesses out of the body. And in like manner
we shall give the same account of the cause of the things which we
do right; and we shall no longer allege as causes of any evil to us,
either slave or neighbour, or wife or children, being persuaded that,
if we do not think things to he what we do think them to be, we do
not the acts which follow from such opinions; and as to thinking or
not thinking, that is in our power and not in externals. "It is so,"
he said. From this day then we shall inquire into and examine nothing
else, what its quality is, or its state, neither land nor slaves nor
horses nor dogs, nothing else than opinions. "I hope so." You see,
then, that you must become a Scholasticus, an animal whom all ridicule,
if you really intend to make an examination of your own opinions:
and that this is not the work of one hour or day, you know yourself.
Of contentment 

With respect to gods, there are some who say that a divine being does
not exist: others say that it exists, but is inactive and careless,
and takes no forethought about anything; a third class say that such
a being exists and exercises forethought, but only about great things
and heavenly things, and about nothing on the earth; a fourth class
say that a divine being exercises forethought both about things on
the earth and heavenly things, but in a general way only, and not
about things severally. There is a fifth class to whom Ulysses and
Socrates belong, who say: "I move not without thy knowledge."

Before all other things, then, it is necessary to inquire about each
of these opinions, whether it is affirmed truly or not truly. For
if there are no gods, how is it our proper end to follow them? And
if they exist, but take no care of anything, in this case also how
will it be right to follow them? But if indeed they do exist and look
after things, still if there is nothing communicated from them to
men, nor in fact to myself, how even so is it right? The wise and
good man, then, after considering all these things, submits his own
mind to him who administers the whole, as good citizens do to the
law of the state. He who is receiving instruction ought to come to
the instructed with this intention: How shall I follow the gods in
all things, how shall I be contented with the divine administration,
and how can I become free?" For he is free to whom everything happens
according, to his will, and whom no man can hinder. "What then, is
freedom madness?" Certainly not: for madness and freedom do not consist.
"But," you say, "I would have everything result just as I like, and
in whatever way I like." You are mad, you are beside yourself. Do
you not know that freedom is a noble and valuable thing? But for me
inconsiderately to wish for things to happen as I inconsiderately
like, this appears to be not only not noble, but even most base. For
how do we proceed in the matter of writing? Do I wish to write the
name of Dion as I choose? No, but I am taught to choose to write it
as it ought to be written. And how with respect to music? In the same
manner. And what universally in every art or science? Just the same.
If it were not so, it would be of no value to know anything, if knowledge
were adapted to every man's whim. Is it, then, in this alone, in this
which is the greatest and the chief thing, I mean freedom, that I
am permitted to will inconsiderately? By no means; but to be instructed
is this, to learn to wish that everything may happen as it does. And
how do things happen? As the disposer has disposed them? And he has
appointed summer and winter, and abundance and scarcity, and virtue
and vice, and all such opposites for the harmony of the whole; and
to each of us he has given a body, and parts of the body, and possessions,
and companions. 

Remembering, then, this disposition of things we ought to go to be
instructed, not that we may change the constitution of things- for
we have not the power to do it, nor is it better that we should have
the power-but in order that, as the things around us are what they
are and by nature exist, we may maintain our minds in harmony with
them things which happen. For can we escape from men? and how is it
possible? And if we associate with them, can we chance them? Who gives
us the power? What then remains, or what method is discovered of holding
commerce with them? Is there such a method by which they shall do
what seems fit to them, and we not the less shall be in a mood which
is conformable to nature? But you are unwilling to endure and are
discontented: and if you are alone, you call it solitude; and of you
are with men, you call them knaves and robbers; and you find fault
with your own parents and children, and brothers and neighbours. But
you ought when you are alone to call this condition by the name of
tranquillity and freedom, and to think yourself like to the gods;
and when you are with many, you ought not to call it crowd, nor trouble,
nor uneasiness, but festival and assembly, and so accept all contentedly.

What, then, is the punishment of those who do not accept? It is to
be what they are. Is any person dissatisfied with being alone, let
him be alone. Is a man dissatisfied with his parents? let him be a
bad son, and lament. Is he dissatisfied with his children? let him
be a bad father. "Cast him into prison." What prison? Where he is
already, for he is there against his will; and where a man is against
his will, there he is in prison. So Socrates was not in prison, for
he was there willingly. "Must my leg then be lamed?" Wretch, do you
then on account of one poor leg find fault with the world? Will you
not willingly surrender it for the whole? Will you not withdraw from
it? Will you not gladly part with it to him who gave it? And will
you be vexed and discontented with the things established by Zeus,
which he with the Moirae who were present and spinning the thread
of your generation, defined and put in order? Know you not how small
a part you are compared with the whole. I mean with respect to the
body, for as to intelligence you are not inferior to the gods nor
less; for the magnitude of intelligence is not measured by length
nor yet by height, but by thoughts. 

Will you not, then, choose to place your good in that in which you
are equal to the gods? "Wretch that I am to have such a father and
mother." What, then, was it permitted to you to come forth, and to
select, and to say: "Let such a man at this moment unite with such
a woman that I may be produced?" It was not permitted, but it was
a necessity for your parents to exist first, and then for you to be
begotten. Of what kind of parents? Of such as they were. Well then,
since they are such as they are, is there no remedy given to you?
Now if you did not know for what purpose you possess the faculty of
vision, you would be unfortunate and wretched if you closed your eyes
when colors were brought before them; but in that you possess greatness
of soul and nobility of spirit for every event that may happen, and
you know not that you possess them, are you not more unfortunate and
wretched? Things are brought close to you which are proportionate
to the power which you possess, but you turn away this power most
particularly at the very time when you ought to maintain it open and
discerning. Do you not rather thank the gods that they have allowed
you to be above these things which they have not placed in your power;
and have made you accountable only for those which are in your power?
As to your parents, the gods have left you free from responsibility;
and so with respect to your brothers, and your body, and possessions,
and death and life. For what, then, have they made you responsible?
For that which alone is in your power, the proper use of appearances.
Why then do you draw on yourself the things for which you are not
responsible? It is, indeed, a giving of trouble to yourself.
How everything may he done acceptably to the gods 

When some one asked, how may a man eat acceptably to the gods, he
answered: If he can eat justly and contentedly, and with equanimity,
and temperately and orderly, will it not be also acceptably to the
gods? But when you have asked for warm water and the slave has not
heard, or if he did hear has brought only tepid water, or he is not
even found to be in the house, then not to be vexed or to burst with
passion, is not this acceptable to the gods? "How then shall a man
endure such persons as this slave?" Slave yourself, will you not bear
with your own brother, who has Zeus for his progenitor, and is like
a son from the same seeds and of the same descent from above? But
if you have been put in any such higher place, will you immediately
make yourself a tyrant? Will you not remember who you are, and whom
you rule? that they are kinsmen, that they are brethren by nature,
that they are the offspring of Zeus? "But I have purchased them, and
they have not purchased me." Do you see in what direction you are
looking, that it is toward the earth, toward the pit, that it is toward
these wretched laws of dead men? but toward the laws of the gods you
are not looking. 
That the deity oversees all things 

When a person asked him how a man could be convinced that all his
actions are under the inspection of God, he answered, Do you not think
that all things are united in one? "I do," the person replied. Well,
do you not think that earthly things have a natural agreement and
union with heavenly things "I do." And how else so regularly as if
by God's command, when He bids the plants to flower, do they flower?
when He bids them to send forth shoots, do they shoot? when He bids
them to produce fruit, how else do they produce fruit? when He bids
the fruit to ripen, does it ripen? when again He bids them to cast
down the fruits, how else do they cast them down? and when to shed
the leaves, do they shed the leaves? and when He bids them to fold
themselves up and to remain quiet and rest, how else do they remain
quiet and rest? And how else at the growth and the wane of the moon,
and at the approach and recession of the sun, are so great an alteration
and change to the contrary seen in earthly things? But are plants
and our bodies so bound up and united with the whole, and are not
our souls much more? and our souls so bound up and in contact with
God as parts of Him and portions of Him; and does not God perceive
every motion of these parts as being His own motion connate with Himself?
Now are you able to think of the divine administration, and about
all things divine, and at the same time also about human affairs,
and to be moved by ten thousand things at the same time in your senses
and in your understanding, and to assent to some, and to dissent from
others, and again as to some things to suspend your judgment; and
do you retain in your soul so many impressions from so many and various
things, and being moved by them, do you fall upon notions similar
to those first impressed, and do you retain numerous arts and the
memories of ten thousand things; and is not God able to oversee all
things, and to be present with all, and to receive from all a certain
communication? And is the sun able to illuminate so large a part of
the All, and to leave so little not illuminated, that part only which
is occupied by the earth's shadow; and He who made the sun itself
and makes it go round, being a small part of Himself compared with
the whole, cannot He perceive all things? 

"But I cannot," the man may reply, "comprehend all these things at
once." But who tells you that you have equal power with Zeus? Nevertheless
he has placed by every man a guardian, every man's Demon, to whom
he has committed the care of the man, a guardian who never sleeps,
is never deceived. For to what better and more careful guardian could
He have entrusted each of us? When, then, you have shut the doors
and made darkness within, remember never to say that you are alone,
for you are not; but God is within, and your Demon is within, and
what need have they of light to see what you are doing? To this God
you ought to swear an oath just as the soldiers do to Caesar. But
they who are hired for pay swear to regard the safety of Caesar before
all things; and you who have received so many and such great favours,
will you not swear, or when you have sworn, will you not abide by
your oath? And what shall you swear? Never to be disobedient, never
to make any charges, never to find fault with anything that he has
given, and never unwillingly to do or to suffer anything, that is
necessary. Is this oath like the soldier's oath? The soldiers swear
not to prefer any man to Caesar: in this oath men swear to honour
themselves before all. 

What philosophy promises 

When a man was consulting him how he should persuade his brother to
cease being angry with him, Epictetus replied: Philosophy does not
propose to secure for a man any external thing. If it did philosophy
would be allowing something which is not within its province. For
as the carpenter's material is wood, and that of the statuary is copper,
so the matter of the art of living is each man's life. "What then
is my brother's?" That again belongs to his own art; but with respect
to yours, it is one of the external things, like a piece of land,
like health, like reputation. But Philosophy promises none of these.
"In every circumstance I will maintain," she says, "the governing
part conformable to nature." Whose governing part? "His in whom I
am," she says. 

"How then shall my brother cease to be angry with me?" Bring him to
me and I will tell him. But I have nothing to say to you about his
anger. 

When the man, who was consulting him, said, "I seek to know this-
how, even if my brother is not reconciled to me, shall I maintain
myself in a state conformable to nature?" Nothing great, said Epictetus,
is produced suddenly, since not even the grape or the fig is. If you
say to me now that you want a fig, I will answer to you that it requires
time: let it flower first, then put forth fruit, and then ripen. Is,
then, the fruit of a fig-tree not perfected suddenly and in one hour,
and would you possess the fruit of a man's mind in so short a time
and so easily? Do not expect it, even if I tell you. 

Of providence 

Do not wonder if for other animals than man all things are provided
for the body, not only food and drink, but beds also, and they have
no need of shoes nor bed materials, nor clothing; but we require all
these additional things. For, animals not being made for themselves,
but for service, it was not fit for them to he made so as to need
other things. For consider what it would be for us to take care not
only of ourselves, but also about cattle and asses, how they should
be clothed, and how shod, and how they should eat and drink. Now as
soldiers are ready for their commander, shod, clothed and armed: but
it would be a hard thing, for the chiliarch to go round and shoe or
clothe his thousand men; so also nature has formed the animals which
are made for service, all ready, prepared, and requiring no further
care. So one little boy with only a stick drives the cattle.

But now we, instead of being thankful that we need not take the same
care of animals as of ourselves, complain of God on our own account;
and yet, in the name of Zeus and the gods, any one thing of those
which exist would be enough to make a man perceive the providence
of God, at least a man who is modest and grateful. And speak not to
me now of the great thins, but only of this, that milk is produced
from grass, and cheese from milk, and wool from skins. Who made these
things or devised them? "No one," you say. Oh, amazing shamelessness
and stupidity! 

Well, let us omit the works of nature and contemplate her smaller
acts. Is there anything less useful than the hair on the chin? What
then, has not nature used this hair also in the most suitable manner
possible? Has she not by it distinguished the male and the female?
does not the nature of every man forthwith proclaim from a distance,
"I am a man; as such approach me, as such speak to me; look for nothing
else; see the signs"? Again, in the case of women, as she has mingled
something softer in the voice, so she has also deprived them of hair
(on the chin). You say: "Not so; the human animal ought to have been
left without marks of distinction, and each of us should have been
obliged to proclaim, 'I am a man.' But how is not the sign beautiful
and becoming, and venerable? how much more beautiful than the cock's
comb, how much more becoming than the lion's mane? For this reason
we ought to preserve the signs which God has given, we ought not to
throw them away, nor to confound, as much as we can, the distinctions
of the sexes. 

Are these the only works of providence in us? And what words are sufficient
to praise them and set them forth according to their worth? For if
we had understanding, ought we to do anything else both jointly and
severally than to sing hymns and bless the deity, and to tell of his
benefits? Ought we not when we are digging and ploughing and eating
to sing this hymn to God? "Great is God, who has given us such implements
with which we shall cultivate the earth: great is God who has given
us hands, the power of swallowing, a stomach, imperceptible growth,
and the power of breathing while we sleep." This is what we ought
to sing on every occasion, and to sing the greatest and most divine
hymn for giving us the faculty of comprehending these things and using
a proper way. Well then, since most of you have become blind, ought
there not to be some man to fill this office, and on behalf of all
to sing the hymn to God? For what else can I do, a lame old man, than
sing hymns to God? If then I was a nightingale, I would do the part
of a nightingale: if I were a swan, I would do like a swan. But now
I am a rational creature, and I ought to praise God: this is my work;
I do it, nor will I desert this post, so long as I am allowed to keep
it; and I exhort you to join in this same song. 

That the logical art is necessary 

Since reason is the faculty which analyses and perfects the rest,
and it ought itself not to be unanalysed, by what should it be analysed?
for it is plain that this should be done either by itself or by another
thing. Either, then, this other thing also is reason, or something
else superior to reason; which is impossible. But if it is reason,
again who shall analyse that reason? For if that reason does this
for itself, our reason also can do it. But we shall require something
else, the thing, will go on to infinity and have no end. Reason therefore
is analysed by itself. "Yes: but it is more urgent to cure (our opinions)
and the like." Will you then hear about those things? Hear. But if
you should say, "I know not whether you are arguing truly or falsely,"
and if I should express myself in any way ambiguously, and you should
say to me, " Distinguish," I will bear with you no longer, and I shall
say to "It is more urgent." This is the reason, I suppose, why they
place the logical art first, as in the measuring of corn we place
first the examination of the measure. But if we do not determine first
what is a modius, and what is a balance, how shall we be able to measure
or weigh anything? 

In this case, then, if we have not fully learned and accurately examined
the criterion of all other things, by which the other things are learned,
shall we be able to examine accurately and to learn fully anything
else? "Yes; but the modius is only wood, and a thing which produces
no fruit." But it is a thing which can measure corn. "Logic also produces
no fruit." As to this indeed we shall see: but then even if a man
should rant this, it is enough that logic has the power of distinguishing
and examining other things, and, as we may say, of measuring and weighing
them. Who says this? Is it only Chrysippus, and Zeno, and Cleanthes?
And does not Antisthenes say so? And who is it that has written that
the examination of names is the beginning of education? And does not
Socrates say so? And of whom does Xenophon write, that he began with
the examination of names, what each name signified? Is this then the
great and wondrous thing to understand or interpret Chrysippus? Who
says this? What then is the wondrous thing? To understand the will
of nature. Well then do you apprehend it yourself by your own power?
and what more have you need of? For if it is true that all men err
involuntarily, and you have learned the truth, of necessity you must
act right. "But in truth I do not apprehend the will of nature." Who
then tells us what it is? They say that it is Chrysippus. I proceed,
and I inquire what this interpreter of nature says. I begin not to
understand what he says; I seek an interpreter of Chrysippus. "Well,
consider how this is said, just as if it were said in the Roman tongue."
What then is this superciliousness of the interpreter? There is no
superciliousness which can justly he charged even to Chrysippus, if
he only interprets the will of nature, but does not follow it himself;
and much more is this so with his interpreter. For we have no need
of Chrysippus for his own sake, but in order that we may understand
nature. Nor do we need a diviner on his own account, but because we
think that through him we shall know the future and understand the
signs given by the gods; nor do we need the viscera of animals for
their own sake, but because through them signs are given; nor do we
look with wonder on the crow or raven, but on God, who through them
gives signs? 

I go then to the interpreter of these things and the sacrificer, and
I say, "Inspect the viscera for me, and tell me what signs they give."
The man takes the viscera, opens them, and interprets them: "Man,"
he says, "you have a will free by nature from hindrance and compulsion;
this is written here in the viscera. I will show you this first in
the matter of assent. Can any man hinder you from assenting to the
truth? No man can. Can any man compel you to receive what is false?
No man can. You see that in this matter you have the faculty of the
will free from hindrance, free from compulsion, unimpeded." Well,
then, in the matter of desire and pursuit of an object, is it otherwise?
And what can overcome pursuit except another pursuit? And what can
overcome desire and aversion except another desire and aversion? But,
you object: "If you place before me the fear of death, you do compel
me." No, it is not what is placed before you that compels, but your
opinion that it is better to do so-and-so than to die. In this matter,
then, it is your opinion that compelled you: that is, will compelled
will. For if God had made that part of Himself, which He took from
Himself and gave to us, of such a nature as to be hindered or compelled
either by Himself or by another, He would not then be God nor would
He be taking care of us as He ought. "This," says the diviner, "I
find in the victims: these are the things which are signified to you.
If you choose, you are free; if you choose, you will blame no one:
you will charge no one. All will be at the same time according to
your mind and the mind of God." For the sake of this divination I
go to this diviner and to the philosopher, not admiring him for this
interpretation, but admiring the things which he interprets.

That we ought not to he angry with the errors of others 

If what philosophers say is true, that all men have one principle,
as in the case of assent the persuasion that a thing is so, and in
the case of dissent the persuasion that a thing is not so, and in
the case of a suspense of judgment the persuasion that a thing is
uncertain, so also in the case of a movement toward anything the persuasion
that a thing is for a man's advantage, and it is impossible to think
that one thing is advantageous and to desire another, and to judge
one thing to be proper and to move toward another, why then are we
angry with the many? "They are thieves and robbers," you may say.
What do you mean by thieves and robbers? "They are mistaken about
good and evil." Ought we then to be angry with them, or to pity them?
But show them their error, and you will see how they desist from their
errors. If they do not see their errors, they have nothing superior
to their present opinion. 

"Ought not then this robber and this adulterer to be destroyed?" By
no means say so, but speak rather in this way: "This man who has been
mistaken and deceived about the most important things, and blinded,
not in the faculty of vision which distinguishes white and black,
but in the faculty which distinguishes good and bad, should we not
destroy him?" If you speak thus, you will see how inhuman this is
which you say, and that it is just as if you would say, "Ought we
not to destroy this blind and deaf man?" But if the greatest harm
is the privation of the greatest things, and the greatest thing in
every man is the will or choice such as it ought to be, and a man
is deprived of this will, why are you also angry with him? Man, you
ought not to be affected contrary to nature by the bad things of another.
Pity him rather: drop this readiness to be offended and to hate, and
these words which the many utter: "These accursed and odious fellows."
How have you been made so wise at once? and how are you so peevish?
Why then are we angry? Is it because we value so much the things of
which these men rob us? Do not admire your clothes, and then you will
not be angry with the thief. Do not admire the beauty of your wife,
and you will not be angry with the adulterer. Learn that a thief and
an adulterer have no place in the things which are yours, but in those
which belong to others and which are not in your power. If you dismiss
these things and consider them as nothing, with whom are you still
angry? But so long as you value these things, be angry with yourself
rather than with the thief and the adulterer. Consider the matter
thus: you have fine clothes; your neighbor has not: you have a window;
you wish to air the clothes. The thief does not know wherein man's
good consists, but he thinks that it consists in having fine clothes,
the very thing which you also think. Must he not then come and take
them away? When you show a cake to greedy persons, and swallow it
all yourself, do you expect them not to snatch it from you? Do not
provoke them: do not have a window: do not air your clothes. I also
lately had an iron lamp placed by the side of my household gods: hearing
a noise at the door, I ran down, and found that the lamp had been
carried off. I reflected that he who had taken the lamp had done nothing
strange. What then? To-morrow, I said, you will find an earthen lamp:
for a man only loses that which he has. "I have lost my garment."
The reason is that you had a garment. "I have pain in my head." Have
you any pain in your horns? Why then are you troubled? for we only
lose those things, we have only pains about those things which we
possess. 

"But the tyrant will chain." What? the leg. "He will take away." What?
the neck. What then will he not chain and not take away? the will.
This is why the ancients taught the maxim, "Know thyself." Therefore
we ought to exercise ourselves in small things and, beginning with
them, to proceed to the greater. "I have pain in the head." Do not
say, "Alas!" "I have pain in the ear." Do not say, "Alas!" And I do
not say that you are not allowed to groan, but do not groan inwardly;
and if your slave is slow in bringing a bandage, do not cry out and
torment yourself, and say, "Everybody hates me": for who would not
hate such a man? For the future, relying on these opinions, walk about
upright, free; not trusting to the size of your body, as an athlete,
for a man ought not to be invincible in the way that an ass is.

Who then is the invincible? It is he whom none of the things disturb
which are independent of the will. Then examining one circumstance
after another I observe, as in the case of an athlete; he has come
off victorious in the first contest: well then, as to the second?
and what if there should be great heat? and what, if it should be
at Olympia? And the same I say in this case: if you should throw money
in his way, he will despise it. Well, suppose you put a young girl
in his way, what then? and what, if it is in the dark? what if it
should be a little reputation, or abuse; and what, if it should be
praise; and what if it should be death? He is able to overcome all.
What then if it be in heat, and what if it is in the rain, and what
if he be in a melancholy mood, and what if he be asleep? He will still
conquer. This is my invincible athlete. 

How we should behave to tyrants 

If a man possesses any superiority, or thinks that he does, when he
does not, such a man, if he is uninstructed, will of necessity be
puffed up through it. For instance, the tyrant says, "I am master
of all." And what can you do for me? Can you give me desire which
shall have no hindrance? How can you? Have you the infallible power
of avoiding what you would avoid? Have you the power of moving toward
an object without error? And how do you possess this power? Come,
when you are in a ship, do you trust to yourself or to the helmsman?
And when you are in a chariot, to whom do you trust but to the driver?
And how is it in all other arts? Just the same. In what then lies
your power? "All men pay respect to me." Well, I also pay respect
to my platter, and I wash it and wipe it; and for the sake of my oil
flask, I drive a peg into the wall. Well then, are these things superior
to me? No, but they supply some of my wants, and for this reason I
take care of them. Well, do I not attend to my ass? Do I not wash
his feet? Do I not clean him? Do you not know that every man has regard
to himself, and to you just the same as he has regard to his ass?
For who has regard to you as a man? Show me. Who wishes to become
like you? Who imitates you, as he imitates Socrates? "But I can cut
off your head." You say right. I had forgotten that I must have regard
to you, as I would to a fever and the bile, and raise an altar to
you, as there is at Rome an altar to fever. 

What is it then that disturbs and terrifies the multitude? is it the
tyrant and his guards? I hope that it is not so. It is not possible
that what is by nature free can be disturbed by anything else, or
hindered by any other thing than by itself. But it is a man's own
opinions which disturb him: for when the tyrant says to a man, "I
will chain your leg," he who values his leg says, "Do not; have pity":
but he who values his own will says, "If it appears more advantageous
to you, chain it." "Do you not care?" I do not care. "I will show
you that I am master." You cannot do that. Zeus has set me free: do
you think that he intended to allow his own son to be enslaved? But
you are master of my carcass: take it. "So when you approach me, you
have no regard to me?" No, but I have regard to myself; and if you
wish me to say that I have regard to you also, I tell you that I have
the same regard to you that I have to my pipkin. 

This is not a perverse self-regard, for the animal is constituted
so as to do all things for itself. For even the sun does all things
for itself; nay, even Zeus himself. But when he chooses to be the
Giver of rain and the Giver of fruits, and the Father of gods and
men, you see that he cannot obtain these functions and these names,
if he is not useful to man; and, universally, he has made the nature
of the rational animal such that it cannot obtain any one of its own
proper interests, if it does not contribute something to the common
interest. In this manner and sense it is not unsociable for a man
to do everything, for the sake of himself. For what do you expect?
that a man should neglect himself and his own interest? And how in
that case can there be one and the same principle in all animals,
the principle of attachment to themselves? 

What then? when absurd notions about things independent of our will,
as if they were good and bad, lie at the bottom of our opinions, we
must of necessity pay regard to tyrants; for I wish that men would
pay regard to tyrants only, and not also to the bedchamber men. How
is it that the man becomes all at once wise, when Caesar has made
him superintendent of the close stool? How is it that we say immediately,
"Felicion spoke sensibly to me." I wish he were ejected from the bedchamber,
that he might again appear to you to be a fool. 

Epaphroditus had a shoemaker whom he sold because he was good for
nothing. This fellow by some good luck was bought by one of Caesar's
men, and became Caesar's shoemaker. You should have seen what respect
Epaphroditus paid to him: "How does the good Felicion do, I pray?"
Then if any of us asked, "What is master doing?" the answer "He is
consulting about something with Felicion." Had he not sold the man
as good for nothing? Who then made him wise all at once? This is an
instance of valuing something else than the things which depend on
the will. 

Has a man been exalted to the tribuneship? All who meet him offer
their congratulations; one kisses his eyes, another the neck, and
the slaves kiss his hands. He goes to his house, he finds torches
lighted. He ascends the Capitol: he offers a sacrifice of the occasion.
Now who ever sacrificed for having had good desires? for having acted
conformably to nature? For in fact we thank the gods for those things
in which we place our good. 

A person was talking to me to-day about the priesthood of Augustus.
I say to him: "Man, let the thing alone: you will spend much for no
purpose." But he replies, "Those who draw up agreements will write
any name." Do you then stand by those who read them, and say to such
persons, "It is I whose name is written there;" And if you can now
be present on all such occasions, what will you do when you are dead?
"My name will remain." Write it on a stone, and it will remain. But
come, what remembrance of you will there be beyond Nicopolis? "But
I shall wear a crown of gold." If you desire a crown at all, take
a crown of roses and put it on, for it will be more elegant in appearance.

About reason, how it contemplates itself 

Every art and faculty contemplates certain things especially. When
then it is itself of the same kind with the objects which it contemplates,
it must of necessity contemplate itself also: but when it is of an
unlike kind, it cannot contemplate itself. For instance, the shoemaker's
art is employed on skins, but itself is entirely distinct from the
material of skins: for this reason it does not contemplate itself.
Again, the grammarian's art is employed about articulate speech; is
then the art also articulate speech? By no means. For this reason
it is not able to contemplate itself. Now reason, for what purpose
has it been given by nature? For the right use of appearances. What
is it then itself? A system of certain appearances. So by its nature
it has the faculty of contemplating itself so. Again, sound sense,
for the contemplation of what things does it belong to us? Good and
evil, and things which are neither. What is it then itself? Good.
And want of sense, what is it? Evil. Do you see then that good sense
necessarily contemplates both itself and the opposite? For this reason
it is the chief and the first work of a philosopher to examine appearances,
and to distinguish them, and to admit none without examination. You
see even in the matter of coin, in which our interest appears to be
somewhat concerned, how we have invented an art, and how many means
the assayer uses to try the value of coin, the sight, the touch, the
smell, and lastly the hearing. He throws the coin down, and observes
the sound, and he is not content with its sounding once, but through
his great attention he becomes a musician. In like manner, where we
think that to be mistaken and not to be mistaken make a great difference,
there we apply great attention to discovering the things which can
deceive. But in the matter of our miserable ruling faculty, yawning
and sleeping, we carelessly admit every appearance, for the harm is
not noticed. 

When then you would know how careless you are with respect to good
and evil, and how active with respect to things which are indifferent,
observe how you feel with respect to being deprived of the sight of
eyes, and how with respect of being deceived, and you will discover
you are far from feeling as you ought to in relation to good and evil.
"But this is a matter which requires much preparation, and much labor
and study." Well then do you expect to acquire the greatest of arts
with small labor? And yet the chief doctrine of philosophers is brief.
If you would know, read Zeno's writings and you will see. For how
few words it requires to say man's end is to follow the god's, and
that the nature of good is a proper use of appearances. But if you
say "What is 'God,' what is 'appearance,' and what is 'particular'
and what is 'universal nature'? then indeed many words are necessary.
If then Epicures should come and say that the good must be in the
body; in this case also many words become necessary, and we must be
taught what is the leading principle in us, and the fundamental and
the substantial; and as it is not probable that the good of a snail
is in the shell, is it probable that the good of a man is in the body?
But you yourself, Epicurus, possess something better than this. What
is that in you which deliberates, what is that which examines everything,
what is that which forms a judgement about the body itself, that it
is the principle part? and why do you light your lamp and labor for
us, and write so many books? is it that we may not be ignorant of
the truth, who we are, and what we are with respect to you? Thus the
discussion requires many words. 

Against those who wish to be admired 

When a man holds his proper station in life, he does not gape after
things beyond it. Man, what do you wish to happen to you? "I am satisfied
if I desire and avoid conformably to nature, if I employ movements
toward and from an object as I am by nature formed to do, and purpose
and design and assent." Why then do you strut before us as if you
had swallowed a spit? "My wish has always been that those who meet
me should admire me, and those who follow me should exclaim, 'Oh,
the great philosopher.'" Who are they by whom you wish to be admired?
Are they not those of whom you are used to say that they are mad?
Well then do you wish to be admired by madmen? 


On precognitions 

Precognitions are common to all men, and precognition is not contradictory
to precognition. For who of us does not assume that Good is useful
and eligible, and in all circumstances that we ought to follow and
pursue it? And who of us does not assume that justice is beautiful
and becoming? When, then, does the contradiction arise? It arises
in the adaptation of the precognitions to the particular cases. When
one man says, "He has done well: he is a brave man," and another says,
"Not so; but he has acted foolishly"; then the disputes arise among
men. This is the dispute among the Jews and the Syrians and the Egyptians
and the Romans; not whether holiness should be preferred to all things
and in all cases should be pursued, but whether it is holy to eat
pig's flesh or not holy. You will find this dispute also between Agamemnon
and Achilles; for call them forth. What do you say, Agamemnon ought
not that to be done which is proper and right? "Certainly." Well,
what do you say, Achilles? do you not admit that what is good ought
to be done? "I do most certainly." Adapt your precognitions then to
the present matter. Here the dispute begins. Agamemnon says, "I ought
not to give up Chryseis to her father." Achilles says, "You ought."
It is certain that one of the two makes a wrong adaptation of the
precognition of ought" or "duty." Further, Agamemnon says, "Then if
I ought to restore Chryseis, it is fit that I take his prize from
some of you." Achilles replies, "Would you then take her whom I love?"
"Yes, her whom you love." "Must I then be the only man who goes without
a prize? and must I be the only man who has no prize?" Thus the dispute
begins. 

What then is education? Education is the learning how to adapt the
natural precognitions to the particular things conformably to nature;
and then to distinguish that of things some are in our power, but
others are not; in our power are will and all acts which depend on
the will; things not in our power are the body, the parts of the body,
possessions, parents, brothers, children, country, and, generally,
all with whom we live in society. In what, then, should we place the
good? To what kind of things shall we adapt it? "To the things which
are in our power?" Is not health then a good thing, and soundness
of limb, and life? and are not children and parents and country? Who
will tolerate you if you deny this? 

Let us then transfer the notion of good to these things. is it possible,
then, when a man sustains damage and does not obtain good things,
that he can be happy? "It is not possible." And can he maintain toward
society a proper behavior? He cannot. For I am naturally formed to
look after my own interest. If it is my interest to have an estate
in land, it is my interest also to take it from my neighbor. If it
is my interest to have a garment, it is my interest also to steal
it from the bath. This is the origin of wars, civil commotions, tyrannies,
conspiracies. And how shall I be still able to maintain my duty toward
Zeus? for if I sustain damage and am unlucky, he takes no care of
me; and what is he to me if he allows me to be in the condition in
which I am? I now begin to hate him. Why, then, do we build temples,
why set up statues to Zeus, as well as to evil demons, such as to
Fever; and how is Zeus the Saviour, and how the Giver of rain, and
the Giver of fruits? And in truth if we place the nature of Good in
any such things, all this follows. 

What should we do then? This is the inquiry of the true philosopher
who is in labour. "Now I do not see what the Good is nor the Bad.
Am I not mad? Yes." But suppose that I place the good somewhere among
the things which depend on the will: all will laugh at me. There will
come some grey-head wearing many gold rings on his fingers and he
will shake his head and say, "Hear, my child. It is right that you
should philosophize; but you ought to have some brains also: all this
that you are doing is silly. You learn the syllogism from philosophers;
but you know how to act better than philosophers do." Man, why then
do you blame me, if I know? What shall I say to this slave? If I am
silent, he will burst. I must speak in this way: "Excuse me, as you
would excuse lovers: I am not my own master: I am mad." 

Against Epicurus

    Even Epicurus perceives that we are by nature social, but having once
placed our good in the husk he is no longer able to say anything else. For on
the other hand he strongly maintains this, that we ought not to admire nor to
accept anything which is detached from the nature of good; and he is right in
maintaining this. How then are we [suspicious], if we have no natural affection
to our children? Why do you advise the wise man not to bring up children? Why
are you afraid that he may thus fall into trouble? For does he fall into
trouble on account of the mouse which is nurtured in the house? What does he
care if a little mouse in the house makes lamentation to him? But Epicurus
knows that if once a child is born, it is no longer in our power not to love it
nor care about it. For this reason, Epicurus says that a man who has any sense
also does not engage in political matters; for he knows what a man must do who
is engaged in such things; for, indeed, if you intend to behave among men as
you do among a swarm of flies, what hinders you? But Epicurus, who knows this,
ventures to say that we should not bring up children. But a sheep does not
desert its own offspring, nor yet a wolf; and shall a man desert his child?
What do you mean? that we should be as silly as sheep? but not even do they
desert their offspring: or as savage as wolves, but not even do wolves desert
their young. Well, who would follow your advice, if he saw his child weeping
after falling on the ground? For my part I think that, even if your mother and
your father had been told by an oracle that you would say what you have said,
they would not have cast you away.

How we should struggle with circumstances

    It is circumstances which show what men are. Therefore when a difficulty
falls upon you, remember that God, like a trainer of wrestlers, has matched you
with a rough young man. "For what purpose?" you may say, Why, that you may
become an Olympic conqueror; but it is not accomplished without sweat. In my
opinion no man has had a more profitable difficulty than you have had, if you
choose to make use of it as an athlete would deal with a young antagonist. We
are now sending a scout to Rome; but no man sends a cowardly scout, who, if he
only hears a noise and sees a shadow anywhere, comes running back in terror and
reports that the enemy is close at hand. So now if you should come and tell us,
"Fearful is the state of affairs at Rome, terrible is death, terrible is exile;
terrible is calumny; terrible is poverty; fly, my friends; the enemy is near";
we shall answer, "Begone, prophesy for yourself; we have committed only one
fault, that we sent such a scout."
    Diogenes, who was sent as a scout before you, made a different report to
us. He says that death is no evil, for neither is it base: he says that fame is
the noise of madmen. And what has this spy said about pain, about pleasure, and
about poverty? He says that to be naked is better than any purple robe, and to
sleep on the bare ground is the softest bed; and he gives as a proof of each
thing that he affirms his own courage, his tranquillity his freedom, and the
healthy appearance and compactness of his body. "There is no enemy he says;
"all is peace." How so, Diogenes? "See," he replies, "if I am struck, if I have
been wounded, if I have fled from any man." This is what a scout ought to be.
But you come to us and tell us one thing after another. Will you not go back,
and you will see clearer when you have laid aside fear?
    What then shall I do? What do you do when you leave a ship? Do you take
away the helm or the oars? What then do you take away? You take what is your
own, your bottle and your wallet; and now if you think of what is your own, you
will never claim what belongs to others. The emperor says, "Lay aside your
laticlave." See, I put on the angusticlave. "Lay aside this also." See, I have
only my toga. "Lay aside your toga." See, I am naked. "But you still raise my
envy." Take then all my poor body; when, at a man's command, I can throw away
my poor body, do I still fear him?
    "But a certain person will not leave to me the succession to his estate."
What then? had I forgotten that not one of these things was mine. How then do
we call them mine? just as we call the bed in the inn. If, then, the innkeeper
at his death leaves you the beds, all well; but if he leaves them to another,
he will have them, and you will seek another bed. If then you shall not find
one, you will sleep on the ground: only sleep with a good will and snore, and
remember that tragedies have their place among the rich and kings and tyrants,
but no poor man fills a part in the tragedy, except as one of the chorus. Kings
indeed commence with prosperity: "ornament the palaces with garlands," then
about the third or fourth act they call out, "O Cithaeron, why didst thou
receive me?" Slave, where are the crowns, where the diadem? The guards help
thee not at all. When then you approach any of these persons, remember this
that you are approaching a tragedian, not the actor but OEdipus himself. But
you say, "Such a man is happy; for he walks about with many," and I also place
myself with the many and walk about with many. In sum remember this: the door
is open; be not more timid than little children, but as they say, when the
thing does not please them, "I will play no loner," so do you, when things seem
to you of such a kind, say I will no longer play, and begone: but if you stay,
do not complain.

On the same

    If these things are true, and if we are not silly, and are not acting
hypocritically when we say that the good of man is in the will, and the evil
too, and that everything else does not concern us, why are we still disturbed,
why are we still afraid? The things about which we have been busied are in no
man's power: and the things which are in the power of others, we care not for.
What kind of trouble have we still?
    "But give me directions." Why should I give you directions? has not Zeus
given you directions? Has he not given to you what is your own free from
hindrance and free from impediment, and what is not your own subject to
hindrance and impediment? What directions then, what kind of orders did you
bring when you came from him? Keep by every means what is your own; do not
desire what belongs to others. Fidelity is your own, virtuous shame is your
own; who then can take these things from you? who else than yourself will
hinder you from using them? But how do you act? when you seek what is not your
own, you lose that which is your own. Having such promptings and commands from
Zeus, what kind do you still ask from me? Am I more powerful than he, am I more
worthy of confidence? But if you observe these, do you want any others besides?
"Well, but he has not given these orders" you will say. Produce your
precognitions, produce the proofs of philosophers, produce what you have often
heard, and produce what you have said yourself, produce what you have read,
produce what you have meditated on (and you will then see that all these things
are from God). How long, then, is it fit to observe these precepts from God,
and not to break up the play? As long as the play is continued with propriety.
In the Saturnalia a king is chosen by lot, for it has been the custom to play
at this game. The king commands: "Do you drink," "Do you mix the wine," "Do you
sing," "Do you go," "Do you come." I obey that the game may be broken up
through me. But if he says, "Think that you are in evil plight": I answer, "I
do not think so"; and who compel me to think so? Further, we agreed to play
Agamemnon and Achilles. He who is appointed to play Agamemnon says to me, "Go
to Achilles and tear from him Briseis." I go. He says, "Come," and I come.
    For as we behave in the matter of hypothetical arguments, so ought we to do
in life. "Suppose it to be night." I suppose that it is night. "Well then; is
it day?" No, for I admitted the hypothesis that it was night. "Suppose that you
think that it is night?" Suppose that I do. "But also think that it is night."
That is not consistent with the hypothesis. So in this case also: "Suppose that
you are unfortunate." Well, suppose so. "Are you then unhappy?" Yes. "Well,
then, are you troubled with an unfavourable demon?" Yes. "But think also that
you are in misery." This is not consistent with the hypothesis; and Another
forbids me to think so.
    How long then must we obey such orders? As long as it is profitable; and
this means as long as I maintain that which is becoming and consistent.
Further, some men are sour and of bad temper, and they say, "I cannot sup with
this man to be obliged to hear him telling daily how he fought in Mysia: 'I
told you, brother, how I ascended the hill: then I began to be besieged
again.'" But another says, "I prefer to get my supper and to hear him talk as
much as he likes." And do you compare these estimates: only do nothing in a
depressed mood, nor as one afflicted, nor as thinking that you are in misery,
for no man compels you to that. Has it smoked in the chamber? If the smoke is
moderate, I will stay; if it is excessive, I go out: for you must always
remember this and hold it fast, that the door is open. Well, but you say to me,
"Do not live in Nicopolis." I will not live there. "Nor in Athens." I will not
live in Athens. "Nor in Rome." I will not live in Rome. "Live in Gyarus." I
will live in Gyarus, but it seems like a great smoke to live in Gyarus; and I
depart to the place where no man will hinder me from living, for that
dwelling-place is open to all; and as to the last garment, that is the poor
body, no one has any power over me beyond this. This was the reason why
Demetrius said to Nero, "You threaten me with death, but nature threatens you."
If I set my admiration on the poor body, I have given myself up to be a slave:
if on my little possessions, I also make myself a slave: for I immediately make
it plain with what I may be caught; as if the snake draws in his head, I tell
you to strike that part of him which he guards; and do you he assured that
whatever part you choose to guard, that part your master will attack.
Remembering this, whom will you still flatter or fear?
    "But I should like to sit where the Senators sit." Do you see that you are
putting yourself in straits, you are squeezing yourself. "How then shall I see
well in any other way in the amphitheatre?" Man, do not be a spectator at all;
and you will not be squeezed. Why do you give yourself trouble? Or wait a
little, and when the spectacle is over, seat yourself in the place reserved for
the Senators and sun yourself. For remember this general truth, that it is we
who squeeze ourselves, who put ourselves in straits; that is, our opinions
squeeze us and put us in straits. For what is it to be reviled? Stand by a
stone and revile it; and what will you gain? If, then, a man listens like a
stone, what profit is there to the reviler? But if the reviler has as a
stepping-stone the weakness of him who is reviled, then he accomplishes
something. "Strip him." What do you mean by "him"? Lay hold of his garment,
strip it off. "I have insulted you." Much good may it do you.
    This was the practice of Socrates: this was the reason why he always had
one face. But we choose to practice and study anything rather than the means by
which we shall be unimpeded and free. You say, "Philosophers talk paradoxes."
But are there no paradoxes in the other arts? and what is more paradoxical than
to puncture a man's eye in order that he may see? If any one said this to a man
ignorant of the surgical art, would he not ridicule the speaker? Where is the
wonder then if in philosophy also many things which are true appear paradoxical
to the inexperienced?
In how many ways appearances exist, and what aids we should provide against
                                     them

    Appearances to us in four ways: for either things appear as they are; or
they are not, and do not even appear to be; or they are, and do not appear to
be; or they are not, and yet appear to be. Further, in all these cases to form
a right judgement is the office of an educated man. But whatever it is that
annoys us, to that we ought to apply a remedy. If the sophisms of Pyrrho and of
the Academics are what annoys, we must apply the remedy to them. If it is the
persuasion of appearances, by which some things appear to be good, when they
are not good, let us seek a remedy for this. If it is habit which annoys us, we
must try to seek aid against habit. What aid then can we find against habit,
The contrary habit. You hear the ignorant say: "That unfortunate person is
dead: his father and mother are overpowered with sorrow; he was cut off by an
untimely death and in a foreign land." Here the contrary way of speaking: tear
yourself from these expressions: oppose to one habit the contrary habit; to
sophistry oppose reason, and the exercise and discipline of reason; against
persuasive appearances we ought to have manifest precognitions, cleared of all
impurities and ready to hand.
    When death appears an evil, we ought to have this rule in readiness, that
it is fit to avoid evil things, and that death is a necessary thing. For what
shall I do, and where shall I escape it? Suppose that I am not Sarpedon, the
son of Zeus, nor able to speak in this noble way: "I will go and I am resolved
either to behave bravely myself or to give to another the opportunity of doing
so; if I cannot succeed in doing anything myself, I will not grudge another the
doing of something noble." Suppose that it is above our power to act thus; is
it not in our power to reason thus? Tell me where I can escape death: discover
for me the country, show me the men to whom I must go, whom death does not
visit. Discover to me a charm against death. If I have not one, what do you
wish me to do? I cannot escape from death. Shall I not escape from the fear of
death, but shall I die lamenting and trembling? For the origin of perturbation
is this, to wish for something, and that this should not happen. Therefore if I
am able to change externals according to my wish, I change them; but if I
cannot, I am ready to tear out the eyes of him who hinders me. For the nature
of man is not to endure to be deprived of the good, and not to endure the
falling into the evil. Then, at last, when I am neither able to change
circumstances nor to tear out the eyes of him who hinders me, I sit down and
groan, and abuse whom I can, Zeus and the rest of the gods. For if they do not
care for me, what are they to me? "Yes, but you will be an impious man." In
what respect then will it be worse for me than it is now? To sum up, remember
this that unless piety and your interest be in the same thing, piety cannot be
maintained in any man. Do not these things seem necessary?
    Let the followers of Pyrrho and the Academics come and make their
objections. For I, as to my part, have no leisure for these disputes, nor am I
able to undertake the defense of common consent. If I had a suit even about a
bit of land, I would call in another to defend my interests. With what evidence
then am I satisfied? With that which belongs to the matter in hand. How indeed
perception is effected, whether through the whole body or any part, perhaps I
cannot explain: for both opinions perplex me. But that you and I are not the
same, I know with perfect certainty. "How do you know it?" When I intend to
swallow anything, I never carry it to your b month, but to my own. When I
intend to take bread, I never lay hold of a broom, but I always go to the bread
as to a mark. And you yourselves who take away the evidence of the senses, do
you act otherwise? Who among you, when he intended to enter a bath, ever went
into a mill?
    What then? Ought we not with all our power to hold to this also, the
maintaining of general opinion, and fortifying ourselves against the arguments
which are directed against it? Who denies that we ought to do this? Well, he
should do it who is able, who has leisure for it; but as to him who trembles
and is perturbed and is inwardly broken in heart, he must employ his time
better on something else.

That we ought not to he angry with men; and what are the small and the great
                               things among men

    What is the cause of assenting to anything? The fact that it appears to be
true. It is not possible then to assent to that which appears not to be true.
Why? Because this is the nature of the understanding, to incline to the true,
to be dissatisfied with the false, and in matters uncertain to withhold assent.
What is the proof of this? "Imagine, if you can, that it is now night." It is
not possible. "Take away your persuasion that it is day." It is not possible.
"Persuade yourself or take away your persuasion that the stars are even in
number." It is impossible. When, then, any man assents to that which is false,
be assured that he did not intend to assent to it as false, for every soul is
unwillingly deprived of the truth, as Plato says; but the falsity seemed to him
to be true. Well, in acts what have we of the like kind as we have here truth
or falsehood? We have the fit and the not fit, the profitable and the
unprofitable, that which is suitable to a person and that which is not, and
whatever is like these. Can, then, a man think that a thing is useful to him
and not choose it? He cannot. How says Medea?
       "'Tis true I know what evil I shall do,
       But passion overpowers the better council.'"
She thought that to indulge her passion and take vengeance on her husband was
more profitable than to spare her children. "It was so; but she was deceived."
Show her plainly that she is deceived, and she will not do it; but so long as
you do not show it, what can she follow except that which appears to herself?
Nothing else. Why, then, are you angry with the unhappy woman that she has been
bewildered about the most important things, and is become a viper instead of a
human creature? And why not, if it is possible, rather pity, as we pity the
blind and the lame, those who are blinded and maimed in the faculties which are
supreme?
    Whoever, then, clearly remembers this, that to man the measure of every act
is the appearance- whether the thing appears good or bad: if good, he is free
from blame; if bad, himself suffers the penalty, for it is impossible that he
who is deceived can be one person, and he who suffers another person- whoever
remembers this will not be angry with any man, will not be vexed at any man,
will not revile or blame any man, nor hate nor quarrel with any man.
    "So then all these great and dreadful deeds have this origin, in the
appearance?" Yes, this origin and no other. The Iliad is nothing else than
appearance and the use of appearances. It appeared to Paris to carry off the
wife of Menelaus: it appeared to Helen to follow him. If then it had appeared
to Menelaus to feel that it was a gain to be deprived of such a wife, what
would have happened? Not only a wi would the Iliad have been lost, but the
Odyssey also. "On so small a matter then did such great things depend?" But
what do you mean by such great things? Wars and civil commotions, and the
destruction of many men and cities. And what great matter is this? "Is it
nothing?" But what great matter is the death of many oxen, and many sheep, and
many nests of swallows or storks being burnt or destroyed? "Are these things,
then, like those?" Very like. Bodies of men are destroyed, and the bodies of
oxen and sheep; the dwellings of men are burnt, and the nests of storks. What
is there in this great or dreadful? Or show me what is the difference between a
man's house and a stork's nest, as far as each is a dwelling; except that man
builds his little houses of beams and tiles and bricks, and the stork builds
them of sticks and mud. "Are a stork and a man, then, like things?" What say
you? In body they are very much alike.
    "Does a man then differ in no respect from a stork?" Don't suppose that I
say so; but there is no difference in these matters. "In what, then, is the
difference?" Seek and you will find that there is a difference in another
matter. See whether it is not in a man the understanding of what he does, see
if it is not in social community, in fidelity, in modesty, in steadfastness, in
intelligence. Where then is the great good and evil in men? It is where the
difference is. If the difference is preserved and remains fenced round, and
neither modesty is destroyed, nor fidelity, nor intelligence, then the man also
is preserved; but if any of these things is destroyed and stormed like a city,
then the man too perishes; and in this consist the great things. Paris, you
say, sustained great damage, then, when the Hellenes invaded and when they
ravaged Troy, and when his brothers perished. By no means; for no man is
damaged by an action which is not his own; but what happened at that time was
only the destruction of storks' nests: now the ruin of Paris was when he lost
the character of modesty, fidelity, regard to hospitality, and to decency. When
was Achilles ruined? Was it when Patroclus died? Not so. But it happened when
he began to be angry, when he wept for a girl, when he forgot that he was at
Troy not to get mistresses, but to fight. These things are the ruin of men,
this is being besieged, this is the destruction of cities, when right opinions
are destroyed, when they are corrupted.
    "When, then, women are carried off, when children are made captives, and
when the men are killed, are these not evils?" How is it then that you add to
the facts these opinions? Explain this to me also. "I shall not do that; but
how is it that you say that these are not evils?" Let us come to the rules:
produce the precognitions: for it is because this is neglected that we cannot
sufficiently wonder at what men do. When we intend to judge of weights, we do
not judge by guess: where we intend to judge of straight and crooked, we do not
judge by guess. In all cases where it is our interest to know what is true in
any matter, never will any man among us do anything by guess. But in things
which depend on the first and on the only cause of doing right or wrong, of
happiness or unhappiness, of being unfortunate or fortunate, there only we are
inconsiderate and rash. There is then nothing like scales, nothing like a rule:
but some appearance is presented, and straightway I act according to it. Must I
then suppose that I am superior to Achilles or Agamemnon, so that they by
following appearances do and suffer so many evils: and shall not the appearance
be sufficient for me? And what tragedy has any other beginning? The Atreus of
Euripides, what is it? An appearance. The OEdipus of Sophocles, what is it? An
appearance. The Phoenix? An appearance. The Hippolytus? An appearance. What
kind of a man then do you suppose him to be who pays no regard to this matter?
And what is the name of those who follow every appearance? "They are called
madmen." Do we then act at all differently?

Chapter 29

On constancy

    The being of the Good is a certain Will; the being of the Bad is a certain
kind of Will. What then are externals? Materials for the Will, about which the
will being conversant shall obtain its own good or evil. How shall it obtain
the good? If it does not admire the materials; for the opinions about the
materials, if the opinions are right, make the will good: but perverse and
distorted opinions make the will bad. God has fixed this law, and says, "If you
would have anything good, receive it from yourself." You say, "No, but I have
it from another." Do not so: but receive it from yourself. Therefore when the
tyrant threatens and calls me, I say, "Whom do you threaten If he says, "I will
put you in chains," I say, "You threaten my hands and my feet." If he says, "I
will cut off your head," I reply, "You threaten my head." If he says, "I will
throw you into prison," I say, "You threaten the whole of this poor body." If
he threatens me with banishment, I say the same. "Does he, then, not threaten
you at all?" If I feel that all these things do not concern me, he does not
threaten me at all; but if I fear any of them, it is I whom he threatens. Whom
then do I fear? the master of what? The master of things which are in my own
power? There is no such master. Do I fear the master of things which are not in
my power? And what are these things to me?
    "Do you philosophers then teach us to despise kings?" I hope not. Who among
us teaches to claim against them the power over things which they possess? Take
my poor body, take my property, take my reputation, take those who are about
me. If I advise any persons to claim these things, they may truly accuse me.
"Yes, but I intend to command your opinions also." And who has given you this
power? How can you conquer the opinion of another man? "By applying terror to
it," he replies, "I will conquer it." Do you not know that opinion conquers
itself, and is not conquered by another? But nothing else can conquer Will
except the Will itself. For this reason, too, the law of God is most powerful
and most just, which is this: "Let the stronger always be superior to the
weaker." "Ten are stronger than one." For what? For putting in chains, for
killing, for dragging whither they choose, for taking away what a man has. The
ten therefore conquer the one in this in which they are stronger. "In what then
are the ten weaker," If the one possess right opinions and the others do not.
"Well then, can the ten conquer in this matter?" How is it possible? If we were
placed in the scales, must not the heavier draw down the scale in which it is?
    "How strange, then, that Socrates should have been so treated by the
Athenians." Slave, why do you say Socrates? Speak of the thing as it is: how
strange that the poor body of Socrates should have been carried off and dragged
to prison by stronger men, and that any one should have given hemlock to the
poor body of Socrates, and that it should breathe out the life. Do these things
seem strange. do they seem unjust, do you on account of these things blame God?
Had Socrates then no equivalent for these things, Where, then, for him was the
nature of good? Whom shall we listen to, you or him? And what does Socrates
say? "Anytus and Meletus can kill me, but they cannot hurt me": and further, he
says, "If it so pleases God, so let it be."
    But show me that he who has the inferior principles overpowers him who is
superior in principles. You will never show this, nor come near showing it; for
this is the law of nature and of God that the superior shall always overpower
the inferior. In what? In that in which it is superior. One body is stronger
than another: many are stronger than one: the thief is stronger than he who is
not a thief. This is the reason why I also lost my lamp, because in wakefulness
the thief was superior to me. But the man bought the lamp at this price: for a
lamp he became a thief, a faithless fellow, and like a wild beast. This seemed
to him a good bargain. Be it so. But a man has seized me by the cloak, and is
drawing me to the public place: then others bawl out, "Philosopher, what has
been the use of your opinions? see you are dragged to prison, you are going to
be beheaded." And what system of philosophy could f have made so that, if a
stronger man should have laid hold of my cloak, I should not be dragged off;
that if ten men should have laid hold of me and cast me into prison, I should
not be cast in? Have I learned nothing else then? I have learned to see that
everything which happens, if it be independent of my will, is nothing to me. I
may ask if you have not gained by this. Why then do you seek advantage in
anything else than in that in which you have learned that advantage is?
    Then sitting in prison I say: "The man who cries out in this way neither
hears what words mean, nor understands what is said, nor does he care at all to
know what philosophers say or what they do. Let him alone."
    But now he says to the prisoner, "Come out from your prison." If you have
no further need of me in prison, I come out: if you should have need of me
again, I will enter the prison. "How long will you act thus?" So long as reason
requires me to be with the body: but when reason does not require this, take
away the body, and fare you well. Only we must not do it inconsiderately, nor
weakly, nor for any slight reason; for, on the other hand, God does not wish it
to be done, and he has need of such a world and such inhabitants in it. But if
he sounds the signal for retreat, as he did to Socrates, we must obey him who
gives the signal, as if he were a general.
    "Well, then, ought we to say such things to the many?" Why should we? Is it
not enough for a man to be persuaded himself? When children come clapping their
hands and crying out, "To-day is the good Saturnalia," do we say, "The
Saturnalia are not good?" By no means, but we clap our hands also. Do you also
then, when you are not able to make a man change his mind, be assured that he
is a child, and clap your hands with him, and if you do not choose to do this,
keep silent.
    A man must keep this in mind; and when he is called to any such difficulty,
he should know that the time is come for showing if he has been instructed. For
he who is come into a difficulty is like a young man from a school who has
practiced the resolution of syllogisms; and if any person proposes to him an
easy syllogism, he says, "Rather propose to me a syllogism which is skillfully
complicated that I may exercise myself on it." Even athletes are dissatisfied
with slight young men, and say "He cannot lift me." "This is a youth of noble
disposition." But when the time of trial is come, one of you must weep and say,
"I wish that I had learned more." A little more of what? If you did not learn
these things in order to show them in practice, why did you learn them? I think
that there is some one among you who are sitting here, who is suffering like a
woman in labour, and saying, "Oh, that such a difficulty does not present
itself to me as that which has come to this man; oh, that I should be wasting
my life in a corner, when I might be crowned at Olympia. When will any one
announce to me such a contest?" Such ought to be the disposition of all of you.
Even among the gladiators of Caesar there are some who complain grievously that
they are not brought forward and matched, and they offer up prayers to God and
address themselves to their superintendents entreating that they might fight.
And will no one among you show himself such? I would willingly take a voyage
for this purpose and see what my athlete is doing, how he is studying his
subject. "I do not choose such a subject," he says. Why, is it in your power to
take what subject you choose? There has been given to you such a body as you
have, such parents, such brethren, such a country, such a place in your
country: then you come to me and say, "Change my subject." Have you not
abilities which enable you to manage the subject which has been given to you?
"It is your business to propose; it is mine to exercise myself well." However,
you do not say so, but you say, "Do not propose to me such a tropic, but such:
do not urge against me such an objection, but such." There will be a time,
perhaps, when tragic actors will suppose that they are masks and buskins and
the long cloak. I say, these things, man, are your material and subject. Utter
something that we may know whether you are a tragic actor or a buffoon; for
both of you have all the rest in common. If any one then should take away the
tragic actor's buskins and his mask, and introduce him on the stage as a
phantom, is the tragic actor lost, or does he still remain? If he has voice, he
still remains.
    An example of another kind. "Assume the governorship of a province." I
assume it, and when I have assumed it, I show how an instructed man behaves.
"Lay aside the laticlave and, clothing yourself in rags, come forward in this
character." What then have I not the power of displaying a good voice? How,
then, do you now appear? As a witness summoned by God. "Come forward, you, and
bear testimony for me, for you are worthy to be brought forward as a witness by
me: is anything external to the will good or bad? do I hurt any man? have I
made every man's interest dependent on any man except himself?" What testimony
do you give for God? "I am in a wretched condition, Master, and I am
unfortunate; no man cares for me, no man gives me anything; all blame me, all
speak ill of me." Is this the evidence that you are going to give, and disgrace
his summons, who has conferred so much honour on you, and thought you worthy of
being called to bear such testimony?
    But suppose that he who has the power has declared, "I judge you to be
impious and profane." What has happened to you? "I have been judged to be
impious and profane?" Nothing else? "Nothing else." But if the same person had
passed judgment on an hypothetical syllogism, and had made a declaration, "the
conclusion that, if it is day, it is light, I declare to be false," what has
happened to the hypothetical syllogism? who is judged in this case? who has
been condemned? the hypothetical syllogism, or the man who has been deceived by
it? Does he, then, who has the power of making any declaration about you know
what is pious or impious? Has he studied it, and has he learned it? Where? From
whom? Then is it the fact that a musician pays no regard to him who declares
that the lowest chord in the lyre is the highest; nor yet a geometrician, if he
declares that the lines from the centre of a circle to the circumference are
not equal; and shall he who is really instructed pay any regard to the
uninstructed man when he pronounces judgment on what is pious and what is
impious, on what is just and unjust? Oh, the signal wrong done by the
instructed. Did they learn this here?
    Will you not leave the small arguments about these matters to others, to
lazy fellows, that they may sit in a corner and receive their sorry pay, or
grumble that no one gives them anything; and will you not come forward and make
use of what you have learned? For it is not these small arguments that are
wanted now: the writings of the Stoics are full of them. What then is the thing
which is wanted? A man who shall apply them, one who by his acts shall bear
testimony to his words. Assume, I, entreat you, this character, that we may no
longer use in the schools the examples of the ancients but may have some
example of our own.
    To whom then does the contemplation of these matters belong? To him who has
leisure, for man is an animal that loves contemplation. But it is shameful to
contemplate these things as runaway slaves do; we should sit, as in a theatre,
free from distraction, and listen at one time to the tragic actor, at another
time to the lute-player; and not do as slaves do. As soon as the slave has
taken his station he praises the actor and at the same time looks round: then
if any one calls out his master's name, the slave is immediately frightened and
disturbed. It is shameful for philosophers thus to contemplate the works of
nature. For what is a master? Man is not the master of man; but death is, and
life and pleasure and pain; for if he comes without these things, bring Caesar
to me and you will see how firm I am. But when he shall come with these things,
thundering and lightning, and when I am afraid of them, what do I do then
except to recognize my master like the runaway slave? But so long as I have any
respite from these terrors, as a runaway slave stands in the theatre, so do I:
I bathe, I drink, I sing; but all this I do with terror and uneasiness. But if
I shall release myself from my masters, that is from those things by means of
which masters are formidable, what further trouble have I, what master have I
still?
    "What then, ought we to publish these things to all men?" No, but we ought
to accommodate ourselves to the ignorant and to say: "This man recommends to me
that which he thinks good for himself: I excuse him." For Socrates also excused
the gaoler, who had the charge of him in prison and was weeping when Socrates
was going to drink the poison, and said, "How generously he laments over us."
Does he then say to the gaoler that for this reason we have sent away the
women? No, but he says it to his friends who were able to hear it; and he
treats the gaoler as a child.

Chapter 30

What we ought to have ready in difficult circumstances

    When you are going into any great personage, remember that Another also
from above sees what is going on, and that you ought to please Him rather than
the other. He, then, who sees from above asks you: "In the schools what used
you to say about exile and bonds and death and disgrace?" I used to say that
they are things indifferent. "What then do you say of them now? Are they
changed at all?" No. "Are you changed then?" No. "Tell me then what things are
indifferent?" The things which are independent of the will. "Tell me, also,
what follows from this." The things which are independent of the will are
nothing to me. "Tell me also about the Good, what was your opinion?" A will
such as we ought to have and also such a use of appearances. "And the end, what
is it?" To follow Thee. "Do you say this now also?" I say the same now also.
    Then go into the great personage boldly and remember these things; and you
will see what a youth is who has studied these things when he is among men who
have not studied them. I indeed imagine that you will have such thoughts as
these: "Why do we make so great and so many preparations for nothing? Is this
the thing which men name power? Is this the antechamber? this the men of the
bedchamber? this the armed guards? Is it for this that I listened to so many
discourses? All this is nothing: but I have been preparing myself for something
great."

That confidence is not inconsistent with caution

    The opinion of the philosophers, perhaps, seems to some to be a paradox;
but still let us examine as well as we can, if it is true that it is possible
to do everything both with caution and with confidence. For caution seems to be
in a manner contrary to confidence, and contraries are in no way consistent.
That which seems to many to be a paradox in the matter under consideration in
my opinion is of this kind: if we asserted that we ought to employ caution and
in the same things, men might justly accuse us of bringing together things
which cannot be united. But now where is the difficulty in what is said? for if
these things are true, which have been often said and often proved, that the
nature of good is in the use of appearances, and the nature of evil likewise,
and that things independent of our will do not admit either the nature of evil
nor of good, what paradox do the philosophers assert if they say that where
things are not dependent on the will, there you should employ confidence, but
where they are dependent on the will, there you should employ caution? For if
the bad consists in a bad exercise of the will, caution ought only to be used
where things are dependent on the will. But if things independent of the will
and not in our power are nothing to us, with respect to these we must employ
confidence; and thus we shall both be cautious and confident, and indeed
confident because of our caution. For by employing caution toward things which
are really bad, it will result that we shall have confidence with respect to
things which are not so.
    We are then in the condition of deer; when they flee from the huntsmen's
feathers in fright, whither do they turn and in what do they seek refuge as
safe? They turn to the nets, and thus they perish by confounding things which
are objects of fear with things that they ought not to fear. Thus we also act:
in what cases do we fear? In things which are independent of the will. In what
cases, on the contrary, do we behave with confidence, as if there were no
danger? In things dependent on the will. To be deceived then, or to act rashly,
or shamelessly or with base desire to seek something, does not concern us at
all, if we only hit the mark in things which are independent of our will. But
where there is death, or exile or pain or infamy, there we attempt or examine
to run away, there we are struck with terror. Therefore, as we may expect it to
happen with those who err in the greatest matters, we convert natural
confidence into audacity, desperation, rashness, shamelessness; and we convert
natural caution and modesty into cowardice and meanness, which are full of fear
and confusion. For if a man should transfer caution to those things in which
the will may be exercised and the acts of the will, he will immediately, by
willing to be cautious, have also the power of avoiding what he chooses: but if
he transfer it to the things which are not in his power and will, and attempt
to avoid the things which are in the power of others, he will of necessity
fear, he will be unstable, he will be disturbed. For death or pain is not
formidable, but the fear of pain or death. For this reason we commend the poet
who said
       Not death is evil, but a shameful death.
Confidence then ought to be employed against death, and caution against the
fear of death. But now we do the contrary, and employ against death the attempt
to escape; and to our opinion about it we employ carelessness, rashness and
indifference. These things Socrates properly used to call "tragic masks"; for
as to children masks appear terrible and fearful from inexperience, we also are
affected in like manner by events for no other reason than children are by
masks. For what is a child? Ignorance. What is a child? Want of knowledge. For
when a child knows these things, he is in no way inferior to us. What is death?
A "tragic mask." Turn it and examine it. See, it does not bite. The poor body
must be separated from the spirit either now or later, as it was separated from
it before. Why, then, are you troubled, if it be separated now? for if it is
not separated now, it will be separated afterward. Why? That the period of the
universe may be completed, for it has need of the present, and of the future,
and of the past. What is pain? A mask. Turn it and examine it. The poor flesh
is moved roughly, then, on the contrary, smoothly. If this does not satisfy
you, the door is open: if it does, bear. For the door ought to be open for all
occasions; and so we have no trouble.
    What then is the fruit of these opinions? It is that which ought to he the
most noble and the most becoming to those who are really educated, release from
perturbation, release from fear, freedom. For in these matters we must not
believe the many, who say that free persons only ought to be educated, but we
should rather believe the philosophers, who say that the educated only are
free. "How is this?" In this manner. Is freedom anything else than the power of
living as we choose? "Nothing else." Tell me then, ye men, do you wish to live
in error? "We do not." No one then who lives in error is free. Do you wish to
live in fear? Do you wish to live in sorrow? Do you wish to live in
perturbation? "By no means." No one, then, who is in a state of fear or sorrow
or perturbation is free; but whoever is delivered from sorrows and fears and
perturbations, he is at the same time also delivered from servitude. How then
can we continue to believe you, most dear legislators, when you say, "We only
allow free persons to be educated?" For philosophers say we allow none to be
free except the educated; that is, God does not allow it. "When then a man has
turned round before the praetor his own slave, has he done nothing?" He has
done something. "What?" He has turned round his own slave before the praetor.
"Has he done nothing, more?" Yes: he is also bound to pay for him the tax
called the twentieth. "Well then, is not the man who has gone through this
ceremony become free?" No more than he is become free from perturbations. Have
you who are able to turn round others no master? is not money your master, or a
girl or a boy, or some tyrant, or some friend of the tyrant? why do you tremble
then when you are going off to any trial of this kind? It is for this reason
that I often say: Study and hold in readiness these principles by which you may
determine what those things are with reference to which you ought to have
confidence, and those things with reference to which you ought to be cautious:
courageous in that which does not depend on your will; cautious in that which
does depend on it.
    "Well have I not read to you, and do you not know what I was doing?" In
what? "In my little dissertations." Show me how you are with respect to desire
and aversion; and show if you do not fail in getting what you wish, me and if
you do not fall into the things which you would avoid: but as to these long and
laboured sentences, you will take them and blot them out.
    "What then did not Socrates write?" And who wrote so much? But how? As he
could not always have at hand one to argue against his principles or to be
argued against in turn, he used to argue with and examine himself, and he was
always treating at least some one subject in a practical way. These are the
things which a philosopher writes. But little dissertations and that method,
which I speak of, he leaves to others, to the stupid, or to those happy men who
being free from perturbations have leisure, or to such as are too foolish to
reckon consequences.
    And will you now, when the opportunity invites, go and display those things
which you possess, and recite them, and make an idle show, and say, "See how I
make dialogues?" Do not so, my man: but rather say: "See how I am not
disappointed of that which I desire. See how I do not fall into that which I
would avoid. Set death before me, and you will see. Set before me pain, prison,
disgrace and condemnation." This is the proper display of a young man who is
come out of the schools. But leave the rest to others, and let no one ever hear
you say a word about these things; and if any man commends you for them, do not
allow it; but think that you are nobody and know nothing. Only show that you
know this, how never to be disappointed in your desire and how never to fall
into that which you would avoid. Let others labour at forensic causes, problems
and syllogisms: do you labour at thinking about death, chains, the rack, exile;
and do all this with confidence and reliance on him who has called you to these
sufferings, who has judged you worthy of the place in which, being stationed,
you will show what things the rational governing power can do when it takes its
stand against the forces which are not within the power of our will. And thus
this paradox will no longer appear either impossible or a paradox, that a man
ought to be at the same time cautious and courageous: courageous toward the
things which do not depend on the will, and cautious in things which are within
the power of the will.

Of Tranquillity

    Consider, you who are going into court, what you wish to maintain and what
you wish to succeed in. For if you wish to maintain a will conformable to
nature, you have every security, every facility, you have no troubles. For if
you wish to maintain what is in your own power and is naturally free, and if
you are content with these, what else do you care for? For who is the master of
such things? Who can take them away? If you choose to be modest and faithful,
who shall not allow you to be so? If you choose not to be restrained or
compelled, who shall compel you to desire what you think that you ought not to
desire? who shall compel you to avoid what you do not think fit to avoid? But
what do you say? The judge will determine against you something that appears
formidable; but that you should also suffer in trying to avoid it, how can he
do that? When then the pursuit of objects and the avoiding of them are in your
power, what else do you care for? Let this be your preface, this your
narrative, this your confirmation, this your victory, this your peroration,
this your applause.
    Therefore Socrates said to one who was reminding him to prepare for his
trial, "Do you not think then that I have been preparing for it all my life?"
By what kind of preparation? "I have maintained that which was in my own
power." How then? "I have never done anything unjust either in my private or in
my public life."
    But if you wish to maintain externals also, your poor body, your little
property and your little estimation, I advise you to make from this moment all
possible preparation, and then consider both the nature of your judge and your
adversary. If it is necessary to embrace his knees, embrace his knees; if to
weep, weep; if to groan, groan. For when you have subjected to externals what
is your own, then be a slave and do not resist, and do not sometimes choose to
be a slave, and sometimes not choose, but with all your mind be one or the
other, either free or a slave, either instructed or uninstructed, either a
well-bred cock or a mean one, either endure to be beaten until you die or yield
at once; and let it not happen to you to receive many stripes and then to
yield. But if these things are base, determine immediately: "Where is the
nature of evil and good? It is where truth is: where truth is and where nature
is, there is caution: where truth is, there is courage where nature is."
    For what do you think? do you think that, if Socrates had wished to
preserve externals, he would have come forward and said: "Anytus and Meletus
can certainly kill me, but to harm me they are not able?" Was he so foolish as
not to see that this way leads not to the preservation of life and fortune, but
to another end? What is the reason then that he takes no account of his
adversaries, and even irritates them? Just in the same way my friend
Heraclitus, who had a little suit in Rhodes about a bit of land, and had proved
to the judges that his case was just, said, when he had come to the peroration
of his speech, "I will neither entreat you nor do I care what judgment you will
give, and it is you rather than I who are on your trial." And thus he ended the
business. What need was there of this? Only do not entreat; but do not also
say, "I. do not entreat"; unless there is a fit occasion to irritate purposely
the judges, as was the case with Socrates. And you, if you are preparing such a
peroration, why do you wait, why do you obey the order to submit to trial? For
if you wish to be crucified, wait and the cross will come: but if you choose to
submit and to plead your cause as well as you can, you must do what is
consistent with this object, provided you maintain what is your own.
    For this reason also it is ridiculous to say, "Suggest something to me."
What should I suggest to you? "Well, form my mind so as to accommodate itself
to any event." Why that is just the same as if a man who is ignorant of letters
should say, "Tell me what to write when any name is proposed to me." For if I
should tell him to write Dion, and then another should come and propose to him
not the name of Dion but that of Theon, what will be done? what will he write?
But if you behave practiced writing, you are also prepared to write anything
that is required. If you are not, what. can I now suggest? For if circumstances
require something else, what will you say or what will you do? Remember, then,
this general precept and you will need no suggestion. But if you gape after
externals, you must of necessity ramble up and down in obedience to the will of
your master. And who is the master? He who has the power over the things which
you seek to gain or try to avoid.


To those who recommend persons to philosophers

    Diogenes said well to one who asked from him letters of recommendation,
"That you are a man he said, "he will know as soon as he sees you; and he will
know whether you are good or bad, if he is by experience skillful to
distinguish the good and the bad; but if he is without experience, he will
never know, if I write to him ten thousand times." For it is just the same as
if a drachma asked to be recommended to a person to be tested. If he is
skillful in testing silver, he will know what you are, for you will recommend
yourself. We ought then in life also to have some skill as in the case of
silver coin that a man may be able to say, like the judge of silver, "Bring me
any drachma and I will test it." But in the case of syllogisms I would say,
"Bring any man that you please, and I will distinguish for you the man who
knows how to resolve syllogisms and the man who does not." Why? Because I know
how to resolve syllogisms. I have the power, which a man must have who is able
to discover those who have the power of resolving syllogisms. But in life how
do I act? At one time I call a thing good, and at another time bad. What is the
reason? The contrary to that which is in the case of syllogisms, ignorance and
inexperience.

Against a person who had once been detected in adultery

    As Epictetus was saying that man is formed for fidelity, and that he who
subverts fidelity subverts the peculiar characteristic of men, there entered
one of those who are considered to be men of letters, who had once been
detected in adultery in the city. Then Epictetus continued: But if we lay aside
this fidelity for which we are formed and make designs against our neighbor's
wife, what are we are we doing? What else but destroying and overthrowing?
Whom? The man of fidelity, the man of modesty, the man of sanctity. Is this
all? And are we not overthrowing neighbourhood, and friendship, and the
community; and in what place are we putting ourselves? How shall I consider
you, man? As a neighbour, as a friend? What kind of one? As a citizen? Wherein
shall I trust you? So if you were an utensil so worthless that a man could not
use you, you would be pitched out on the dung heaps, and no man would pick you
up. But if, being a man, you are unable to fill any place which befits a man,
what shall we do with you? For suppose that you cannot hold the place of a
friend, can you hold the place of a slave? And who will trust you? Are you not
then content that you also should be pitched somewhere on a dung heap, as a
useless utensil, and a bit of dung? Then will you say, "No man, cares for me, a
man of letters"? They do not, because you are bad and useless. It is just as if
the wasps complained because no man cares for them, but all fly from them, and
if a man can, he strikes them and knocks them down. You have such a sting that
you throw into trouble and pain any man that you wound with it. What would you
have us do with you? You have no place where you can be put.
    "What then, are not women common by nature?" So I say also; for a little
pig is common to all the invited guests, but when the portions have been
distributed, go, if you think it right, and snatch up the portion of him who
reclines next to you, or slyly steal it, or place your hand down by it and lay
hold of it, and if you cannot tear away a bit of the meat, grease your fingers
and lick them. A fine companion over cups, and Socratic guest indeed! "Well, is
not the theatre common to the citizens?" When then they have taken their seats,
come, if you think proper, and eject one of them. In this way women also are
common by nature. When, then, the legislator, like the master of a feast, has
distributed them, will you not also look for your own portion and not filch and
handle what belongs to another. "But I am a man of letters and understand
Archedemus." Understand Archedemus then, and be an adulterer, and faithless,
and instead of a man, be a wolf or an ape: for what is the difference?

How magnanimity is consistent with care

    Things themselves are indifferent; but the use of them is not indifferent.
How then shall a man preserve firmness and tranquillity, and at the same time
be careful and neither rash nor negligent? If he imitates those who play at
dice. The counters are indifferent; the dice are indifferent. How do I know
what the cast will be? But to use carefully and dexterously the cast of the
dice, this is my business. Thus in life also the chief business is this:
distinguish and separate things, and say, "Externals are not in my power: will
is in my power. Where shall I seek the good and the bad? Within, in the things
which are my own." But in what does not belong to you call nothing either good
or bad, or profit or damage or anything of the kind.
    "What then? Should we use such things carelessly?" In no way: for this on
the other hand is bad for the faculty of the will, and consequently against
nature; but we should act carefully because the use is not indifferent and we
should also act with firmness and freedom from perturbations because the
material is indifferent. For where the material is not indifferent, there no
man can hinder me nor compel me. Where I can be hindered and compelled the
obtaining of those things is not in my power, nor is it good or bad; but the
use is either bad or good, and the use is in my power. But it is difficult to
mingle and to bring together these two things, the carefulness of him who is
affected by the matter and the firmness of him who has no regard for it; but it
is not impossible; and if it is, happiness is impossible. But we should act as
we do in the case of a voyage. What can I do? I can choose the master of the
ship, the sailors, the day, the opportunity. Then comes a storm. What more have
I to care for? for my part is done. The business belongs to another- the
master. But the ship is sinking- what then have I to do? I do the only things
that I can, not to be drowned full of fear, nor screaming, nor blaming God, but
knowing that what has been produced must also perish: for I am not an immortal
being, but a man, a part of the whole, as an hour is a part of the day: I must
be present like the hour, and past like the hour. What difference, then, does
it make to me how I pass away, whether by being suffocated or by a fever, for I
must pass through some such means?
    This is just what you will see those doing who play at ball skillfully. No
one cares about the ball being good or bad, but about throwing and catching it.
In this therefore is the skill, this the art, the quickness, the judgement, so
that if I spread out my lap I may not be able to catch it, and another, if I
throw, may catch the ball. But if with perturbation and fear we receive or
throw the ball, what kind of play is it then, and wherein shall a man be
steady, and how shall a man see the order in the game? But one will say,
"Throw"; or, "Do not throw"; and another will say, "You have thrown once." This
is quarreling, not play.
    Socrates, then, knew how to play at ball. How?" By using pleasantry in the
court where he was tried. "Tell me," he says, "Anytus, how do you say that I do
not believe in God. The Demons, who are they, think you? Are they not sons of
Gods, or compounded of gods and men?" When Anytus admitted this, Socrates said,
"Who then, think you, can believe that there are mules, but not asses"; and
this he said as if he were playing at ball. And what was the ball in that case?
Life, chains, banishment, a draught of poison, separation from wife and leaving
children orphans. These were the things with which he was playing; but still he
did play and threw the ball skillfully. So we should do: we must employ all the
care of the players, but show the same indifference about the ball. For we
ought by all means to apply our art to some external material, not as valuing
the material, but, whatever it may be, showing our art in it. Thus too the
weaver does not make wool, but exercises his art upon such as he receives.
Another gives you food and property and is able to take them away and your poor
body also. When then you have received the material, work on it. If then you
come out without having suffered anything, all who meet you will congratulate
you on your escape; but he who knows how to look at such things, if he shall
see that you have behaved properly in the matter, will commend you and be
pleased with you; and if he shall find that you owe your escape to any want of
proper behavior, he will do the contrary. For where rejoicing is reasonable,
there also is congratulation reasonable.
    How then is it said that some external things are according to nature and
others contrary to nature? It is said as it might be said if we were separated
from union: for to the foot I shall say that it is according to nature for it
to be clean; but if you take it as a foot and as a thing not detached, it will
befit it both to step into the mud and tread on thorns, and sometimes to be cut
off for the benefit of the whole body; otherwise it is no longer a foot. We
should think in some way about ourselves also. What are you? A man. If you
consider yourself as detached from other men, it is according to nature to live
to old age, to be rich, to be healthy. But if you consider yourself as a man
and a part of a certain whole, it is for the sake of that whole that at one
time you should be sick, at another time take a voyage and run into danger, and
at another time be in want, and, in some cases, die prematurely. Why then are
you troubled? Do you not know, that as a foot is no longer a foot if it is
detached from the body, so you are no longer a man if you are separated from
other men. For what is a man? A part of a state, of that first which consists
of Gods and of men; then of that which is called next to it, which is a small
image of the universal state. "What then must I be brought to trial; must
another have a fever, another sail on the sea, another die, and another be
condemned?" Yes, for it is impossible in such a body, in such a universe of
things, among so many living together, that such things should not happen, some
to one and others to others. It is your duty then, since you are come here, to
say what you ought, to arrange these things as it is fit. Then some one says,
"I shall charge you with doing me wrong." Much good may it do you: I have done
my part; but whether you also have done yours, you must look to that; for there
is some danger of this too, that it may escape your notice.

Of indifference

    The hypothetical proposition is indifferent: the judgment about it is not
indifferent, but it is either knowledge or opinion or error. Thus life is
indifferent: the use is not indifferent. When any man then tells you that these
things also are indifferent, do not become negligent; and when a man invites
you to be careful, do not become abject and struck with admiration of material
things. And it is good for you to know your own preparation and power, that in
those matters where you have not been prepared, you may keep quiet, and not be
vexed, if others have the advantage over you. For you, too, in syllogisms will
claim to have the advantage over them; and if others should be vexed at this,
you will console them by saying, "I have learned them, and you have not." Thus
also where there is need of any practice, seek not that which is required from
the need, but yield in that matter to those who have had practice, and be
yourself content with firmness of mind.
    Go and salute a certain person. "How?" Not meanly. "But I have been shut
out, for I have not learned to make my way through the window; and when I have
found the door shut, I must either come back or enter through the window." But
still speak to him. "In what way?" Not meanly. But suppose that you have not
got what you wanted. Was this your business, and not his? Why then do you claim
that which belongs to another? Always remember what is your own, and what
belongs to another; and you will not be disturbed. Chrysippus therefore said
well, "So long as future things are uncertain, I always cling to those which
are more adapted to the conservation of that which is according to nature; for
God himself has given me the faculty of such choice." But if I knew that it was
fated for me to be sick, I would even move toward it; for the foot also, if it
had intelligence, would move to go into the mud. For why are ears of corn
produced? Is it not that they may become dry? And do they not become dry that
they may be reaped? for they are not separated from communion with other
things. If then they had perception, ought they to wish never to be reaped? But
this is a curse upon ears of corn, never to be reaped. So we must know that in
the case of men too it is a curse not to die, just the same as not to be
ripened and not to be reaped. But since we must be reaped, and we also know
that we are reaped, we are vexed at it; for we neither know what we are nor
have we studied what belongs to man, as those who have studied horses know what
belongs to horses. But Chrysantas, when he was going to strike the enemy,
checked himself when he heard the trumpet sounding a retreat: so it seemed
better to him to obey the general's command than to follow his own inclination.
But not one of us chooses, even when necessity summons, readily to obey it, but
weeping and groaning we suffer what we do suffer, and we call them
"circumstances." What kind of circumstances, man? If you give the name of
circumstances to the things which are around you, all things are circumstances;
but if you call hardships by this name, what hardship is there in the dying of
that which has been produced? But that which destroys is either a sword, or a
wheel, or the sea, or a tile, or a tyrant. Why do you care about the way of
going down to Hades? All ways are equal. But if you will listen to the truth,
the way which the tyrant sends you is shorter. A tyrant never killed a man in
six months: but a fever is often a year about it. All these things are only
sound and the noise of empty names.
    "I am in danger of my life from Caesar." And am not I in danger who dwell
in Nicopolis, where there are so many earthquakes: and when you are crossing
the Hadriatic, what hazard do you run? Is it not the hazard of your life? "But
I am in danger also as to opinion." Do you mean your own? how? For who can
compel you to have any opinion which you do not choose? But is it as to another
man's opinion? and what kind of danger is yours, if others have false opinions?
"But I am in danger of being banished." What is it to be banished? To be
somewhere else than at Rome? "Yes: what then if I should be sent to Gyara?" If
that suits you, you will go there; but if it does not, you can go to another
place instead of Gyara, whither he also will go, who sends you to Gyara,
whether he choose or not. Why then do you go up to Rome as if it were something
great? It is not worth all this preparation, that an ingenuous youth should
say, "It was not worth while to have heard so much and to have written so much
and to have sat so long by the side of an old man who is not worth much." Only
remember that division by which your own and not your own are distinguished:
never claim anything which belongs to others. A tribunal and a prison are each
a place, one high and the other low; but the will can be maintained equal, if
you choose to maintain it equal in each. And we shall then be imitators of
Socrates, when we are able to write paeans in prison. But in our present
disposition, consider if we could endure in prison another person saying to us.
"Would you like me to read Paeans to you?" "Why do you trouble me? do you not
know the evils which hold me? Can I in such circumstances?" What circumstances?
"I am going to die." And will other men be immortal?


How we ought to use divination

    Through an unreasonable regard to divination many of us omit many duties.
For what more can the diviner see than death or danger or disease, generally
things of that kind? If then I must expose myself to danger for a friend, and
if it is my duty even to die for him, what need have I then for divination?
Have I not within me a diviner who has told me the nature of good and of evil,
and has explained to me the signs of both? What need have I then to consult the
viscera of victims or the flight of birds, and why do I submit when he says,
"It is for your interest"? For does he know what is for my interest, does he
know what is good; and as he has learned the signs of the viscera, has he also
learned the signs of good and evil? For if he knows the signs of these, he
knows the signs both of the beautiful and of the ugly, and of the just and of
the unjust. Do you tell me, man, what is the thing which is signified for me:
is it life or death, poverty or wealth? But whether these things are for my
interest or whether they are not, I do not intend to ask you. Why don't you
give your opinion on matters of grammar, and why do you give it here about
things on which we are all in error and disputing with one another? The woman,
therefore, who intended to send by a vessel a month's provisions to Gratilla in
her banishment, made a good answer to him who said that Domitian would seize
what she sent. "I would rather," she replied, "that Domitian should seize all
than that I should not send it."
    What then leads us to frequent use of divination? Cowardice, the dread of
what will happen. This is the reason why we flatter the diviners. "Pray,
master, shall I succeed to the property of my father?" "Let us see: let us
sacrifice on the occasion." "Yes, master, as fortune chooses." When he has
said, "You shall succeed to the inheritance," we thank him as if we received
the inheritance from him. The consequence is that they play upon us.
    What then should we do? We ought to come without desire or aversion, as the
wayfarer asks of the man whom he meets which of two roads leads (to his
journey's end), without any desire for that which leads to the right rather
than to the left, for he has no wish to go by any road except the road which
leads (to his end). In the same way ought we to come to God also as a guide; as
we use our eyes, not asking them to show us rather such things as we wish, but
receiving the appearances of things such as the eyes present them to us. But
now we trembling take the augur by the hand, and, while we invoke God, we
entreat the augur, and say, "Master have mercy on me; suffer me to come safe
out of this difficulty." Wretch would you have, then, anything other than what
is best? Is there then anything better than what pleases God? Why do you, so
far as in your power, corrupt your judge and lead astray your adviser?

What is the nature of the good

    God is beneficial. But the Good also is beneficial. It is consistent then
that where the nature of God is, there also the nature of the good should be.
What then is the nature of God? Flesh? Certainly not. An estate in land? By no
means. Fame? No. Is it intelligence, knowledge, right reason? Yes. Herein then
simply seek the nature of the good; for I suppose that you do not seek it in a
plant. No. Do you seek it in an irrational animal? No. If then you seek it in a
rational animal, why do you still seek it anywhere except in the superiority of
rational over irrational animals? Now plants have not even the power of using
appearances, and for this reason you do not apply the term good to them. The
good then requires the use of appearances. Does it require this use only? For
if you say that it requires this use only, say that the good, and that
happiness and unhappiness are in irrational animals also. But you do not say
this, and you do right; for if they possess even in the highest degree the use
of appearances, yet they have not the faculty of understanding the use of
appearances; and there is good reason for this, for they exist for the purpose
of serving others, and they exercise no superiority. For the ass, I suppose,
does not exist for any superiority over others. No; but because we had need of
a back which is able to bear something; and in truth we had need also of his
being able to walk, and for this reason he received also the faculty of making
use of appearances, for otherwise he would not have been able to walk. And here
then the matter stopped. For if he had also received the faculty of
comprehending the use of appearances, it is plain that consistently with reason
he would not then have been subjected to us, nor would he have done us these
services, but he would have been equal to us and like to us.
    Will you not then seek the nature of good in the rational animal? for if it
is not there, you not choose to say that it exists in any other thing. "What
then? are not plants and animals also the works of God?" They are; but they are
not superior things, nor yet parts of the Gods. But you are a superior thing;
you are a portion separated from the deity; you have in yourself a certain
portion of him. Why then are you ignorant of your own noble descent? Why do you
not know whence you came? will you not remember when you are eating, who you
are who eat and whom you feed? When you are in conjunction with a woman, will
you not remember who you are who do this thing? When you are in social
intercourse, when you are exercising yourself, when you are engaged in
discussion, know you not that you are nourishing a god, that you are exercising
a god? Wretch, you are carrying about a god with you, and you know it not. Do
you think that I mean some God of silver or of gold, and external? You carry
him within yourself, and you perceive not that you are polluting him by impure
thoughts and dirty deeds. And if an image of God were present, you would not
dare to do any of the things which you are doing: but when God himself is
present within and sees all and hears all, you are not ashamed of thinking such
things and doing such things, ignorant as you are of your own nature and
subject to the anger of God. Then why do we fear when we are sending a young
man from the school into active life, lest he should do anything improperly,
eat improperly, have improper intercourse with women; and lest the rags in
which he is wrapped should debase him, lest fine garments should make him
proud? This youth does not know his own God: he knows not with whom he sets
out. But can we endure when he says, "I wish I had you with me." Have you not
God with you? and do you seek for any other, when you have him? or will God
tell you anything else than this? If you were a statue of Phidias, either
Athena or Zeus you would think broth of yourself and of the artist, and if you
had any understanding you would try to do nothing unworthy of him who made you
or of yourself, and try not to appear in an unbecoming dress to those who look
on you. But now because Zeus has made you, for this reason do you care not how
you shall appear? And yet is the artist like the artist in the other? or the
work in the one case like the other? And what work of an artist, for instance,
has in itself the faculties, which the artist shows in making it? Is it not
marble or bronze, or gold or ivory? and the Athena of Phidias when she has once
extended the hand and received in it the figure of Victory stands in that
attitude forever. But the works of God have power of motion, they breathe, they
have the faculty of using the appearances of things, and the power of examining
them. Being the work of such an artist, do you dishonor him? And what shall I
say, not only that he made you, but also intrusted you to yourself and made you
a deposit to yourself? Will you not think of this too, but do you also dishonor
your guardianship? But if God had intrusted an orphan to you, would you thus
neglect him? He has delivered yourself to your care, and says, "I had no one
fitter to intrust him to than yourself: keep him for me such as he is by
nature, modest, faithful, erect, unterrified, free from passion and
perturbation." And then you do not keep him such.
    But some will say, "Whence has this fellow got the arrogance which he
displays and these supercilious looks?" I have not yet so much gravity as
befits a philosopher; for I do not yet feel confidence in what I have learned
and what I have assented to: I still fear my own weakness. Let me get
confidence and the, you shall see a countenance such as I ought to have and an
attitude such as I ought to have: then I will show to you the statue, when it
is perfected, when it is polished. What do you expect? a supercilious
countenance? Does the Zeus at Olympia lift up his brow? No, his look is fixed
as becomes him who is ready to say
       Irrevocable is my word and shall not fail.
Such will I show myself to you, faithful, modest, noble, free from
perturbation. "What, and immortal too, exempt from old age, and from sickness?"
No, but dying as becomes a god, sickening as becomes a god. This power I
possess; this I can do. But the rest I do not possess, nor can I do. I will
show the nerves of a philosopher. "What nerves are these?" A desire never
disappointed, an aversion which never falls on that which it would avoid, a
proper pursuit, a diligent purpose, an assent which is not rash. These you
shall see.

That when we cannot fulfill that which the character of a man promises, we
                     assume the character of a philosopher

    It is no common thing to do this only, to fulfill the promise of a man's
nature. For what is a man? The answer is: "A rational and mortal being." Then,
by the rational faculty, from whom are we separated? From wild beasts. And from
what others? From sheep and like animals. Take care then to do nothing like a
wild beast; but if you do, you have lost the character of a man; you have not
fulfilled your promise. See that you do nothing like a sheep; but if you do, in
this case the man is lost. What then do we do as sheep? When we act
gluttonously, when we act lewdly, when we act rashly, filthily,
inconsiderately, to what have we declined? To sheep. What have we lost? The
rational faculty. When we act contentiously and harmfully and passionately, and
violently, to what have we declined? To wild beasts. Consequently some of us
are great wild beasts, and others little beasts, of a bad disposition and
small, whence we may say, "Let me be eaten by a lion." But in all these ways
the promise of a man acting as a man is destroyed. For when is a conjunctive
proposition maintained? When it fulfills what its nature promises; so that the
preservation of a complex proposition is when it is a conjunction of truths.
When is a disjunctive maintained? When it fulfills what it promises. When are
flutes, a lyre, a horse, a dog, preserved? What is the wonder then if man also
in like manner is preserved, and in like manner is lost? Each man is improved
and preserved by corresponding acts, the carpenter by acts of carpentry, the
grammarian by acts of grammar. But if a man accustoms himself to write
ungrammatically, of necessity his art will be corrupted and destroyed. Thus
modest actions preserve the modest man, and immodest actions destroy him: and
actions of fidelity preserve the faithful man, and the contrary actions destroy
him. And on the other hand contrary actions strengthen contrary characters:
shamelessness strengthens the shameless man, faithlessness the faithless man,
abusive words the abusive man, anger the man of an angry temper, and unequal
receiving and giving make the avaricious man more avaricious.
    For this reason philosophers admonish us not to be satisfied with learning
only, but also to add study, and then practice. For we have long been
accustomed to do contrary things, and we put in practice opinions which are
contrary to true opinions. If then we shall not also put in practice right
opinions, we shall be nothing more than the expositors of the opinions of
others. For now who among us is not able to discuss according to the rules of
art about good and evil things? "That of things some are good, and some are
bad, and some are indifferent: the good then are virtues, and the things which
participate in virtues; and the are the contrary; and the indifferent are
wealth, health, reputation." Then, if in the midst of our talk there should
happen some greater noise than usual, or some of those who are present should
laugh at us, we are disturbed. Philosopher, where are the things which you were
talking about? Whence did you produce and utter them? From the lips, and thence
only. Why then do you corrupt the aids provided by others? Why do you treat the
weightiest matters as if you were playing a game of dice? For it is one thing
to lay up bread and wine as in a storehouse, and another thing to eat. That
which has been eaten, is digested, distributed, and is become sinews, flesh,
bones, blood, healthy colour, healthy breath. Whatever is stored up, when you
choose you can readily take and show it; but you have no other advantage from
it except so far as to appear to possess it. For what is the difference between
explaining these doctrines and those of men who have different opinions? Sit
down now and explain according to the rules of art the opinions of Epicurus,
and perhaps you will explain his opinions in a more useful manner than Epicurus
himself. Why then do you call yourself a Stoic? Why do you deceive the many?
Why do you deceive the many? Why do you act the part of a Jew, when you are a
Greek? Do you not see how each is called a Jew, or a Syrian or an Egyptian? and
when we see a man inclining to two sides, we are accustomed to say, "This man
is not a Jew, but he acts as one." But when he has assumed the affects of one
who has been imbued with Jewish doctrine and has adopted that sect, then he is
in fact and he is named a Jew. Thus we too being falsely imbued, are in name
Jews, but in fact we are something else. Our affects are inconsistent with our
words; we are far from practicing what we say, and that of which we are proud,
as if we knew it. Thus being, unable to fulfill even what the character of a
man promises, we even add to it the profession of a philosopher, which is as
heavy a burden, as if a man who is unable to bear ten pounds should attempt to
raise the stone which Ajax lifted.

How we may discover the duties of life from names

    Consider who you are. In the first place, you are a man; and this is one
who has nothing superior to the faculty of the will, but all other things
subjected to it; and the faculty itself he possesses unenslaved and free from
subjection. Consider then from what things you have been separated by reason.
You have been separated from wild beasts: you have been separated from domestic
animals. Further, you are a citizen of the world, and a part of it, not one of
the subservient, but one of the principal parts, for you are capable of
comprehending the divine administration and of considering the connection of
things. What then does the character of a citizen promise? To hold nothing as
profitable to himself; to deliberate about nothing as if he were detached from
the community, but to act as the hand or foot would do, if they had reason and
understood the constitution of nature, for they would never put themselves in
motion nor desire anything, otherwise than with reference to the whole.
Therefore the philosophers say well, that if the good man had foreknowledge of
what would happen, he would cooperate toward his own sickness and death and
mutilation, since he knows that these things are assigned to him according to
the universal arrangement, and that the whole is superior to the part and the
state to the citizen. But now, because we do not know the future, it is our
duty to stick to the things which are in their nature more suitable for our
choice, for we were made among other things for this.
    After this, remember that you are a son. What does this character promise?
To consider that everything which is the son's belongs to the father, to obey
him in all things, never to blame him to another, nor to say or do anything
which does him injury, to yield to him in all things and give way, cooperating
with him as far as you can. After this know that you are a brother also, and
that to this character it is due to make concessions; to be easily persuaded,
to speak good of your brother, never to claim in opposition to him any of the
things which are independent of the will, but readily to give them up, that you
may have the larger share in what is dependent on the will. For see what a
thing it is, in place of a lettuce, if it should so happen, or a seat, to gain
for yourself goodness of disposition. How great is the advantage.
    Next to this, if you are senator of any state, remember that you are a
senator: if a youth, that you are a youth: if an old man, that you are an old
man; for each of such names, if it comes to be examined, marks out the proper
duties. But if you go and blame your brother, I say to you, "You have forgotten
who you are and what is your name." In the next place, if you were a smith and
made a wrong use of the hammer, you would have forgotten the smith; and if you
have forgotten the brother and instead of a brother have become an enemy, would
you appear not to have changed one thing for another in that case? And if
instead of a man, who is a tame animal and social, you are become a mischievous
wild beast, treacherous, and biting, have you lost nothing? But, you must lose
a bit of money that you may suffer damage? And does the loss of nothing else do
a man damage? If you had lost the art of grammar or music, would you think the
loss of it a damage? and if you shall lose modesty, moderation and gentleness,
do you think the loss nothing? And yet the things first mentioned are lost by
some cause external and independent of the will, and the second by our own
fault; and as to the first neither to have them nor to lose them is shameful;
but as to the second, not to have them and to lose them is shameful and matter
of reproach and a misfortune. What does the pathic lose? He loses the man. What
does he lose who makes the pathic what he is? Many other things; and he also
loses the man no less than the other. What does he lose who commits adultery?
He loses the modest, the temperate, the decent, the citizen, the neighbour.
What does he lose who is angry? Something else. What does the coward lose?
Something else. No man is bad without suffering some loss and damage. If then
you look for the damage in the loss of money only, all these men receive no
harm or damage; it may be, they have even profit and gain, when they acquire a
bit of money by any of these deeds. But consider that if you refer everything
to a small coin, not even he who loses his nose is in your opinion damaged.
"Yes," you say, "for he is mutilated in his body." Well; but does he who has
lost his smell only lose nothing? Is there, then, no energy of the soul which
is an advantage to him who possesses it, and a damage to him who has lost it?
"Tell me what sort you mean." Have we not a natural modesty? "We have." Does he
who loses this sustain no damage? is he deprived of nothing, does he part with
nothing of the things which belong to him? Have we not naturally fidelity?
natural affection, a natural disposition to help others, a natural disposition
to forbearance? The man then who allows himself to be damaged in these matters,
can he be free from harm and uninjured? "What then? shall I not hurt him, who
has hurt me?" In the first place consider what hurt is, and remember what you
have heard from the philosophers. For if the good consists in the will, and the
evil also in the will, see if what you say is not this: "What then, since that
man has hurt himself by doing an unjust act to me, shall I not hurt myself by
doing some unjust act to him?" Why do we not imagine to something of this kind?
But where there is any detriment to the body or to our possession, there is
harm there; and where the same thing happens to the faculty of the will, there
is no harm; for he who has been deceived or he who has done an unjust act
neither suffers in the head nor in the eye nor in the hip, nor does he lose his
estate; and we wish for nothing else than these things. But whether we shall
have the will modest and faithful or shameless and faithless, we care not the
least, except only in the school so far as a few words are concerned. Therefore
our proficiency is limited to these few words; but beyond them it does not
exist even in the slightest degree

What the beginning of philosophy is

    The beginning of philosophy to him at least who enters on it in the right
way and by the door, is a consciousness of his own weakness and inability about
necessary things. For we come into the world with no natural notion of a
right-angled triangle, or of a diesis, or of a half tone; but we learn each of
these things by a certain transmission according to art; and for this reason
those who do not know them, do not think that they know them. But as to good
and evil, and beautiful and ugly, and becoming and unbecoming, and happiness
and misfortune, and proper and improper, and what we ought to do and what we
ought not to do, whoever came into the world without having an innate idea of
them? Wherefore we all use these names, and we endeavor to fit the
preconceptions to the several cases thus: "He has done well, he has not done
well; he has done as he ought, not as he ought; he has been unfortunate, he has
been fortunate; he is unjust, he is just": who does not use these names? who
among us defers the use of them till he has learned them, as he defers the use
of the words about lines or sounds? And the cause of this is that we come into
the world already taught as it were by nature some things on this matter, and
proceeding from these we have added to them self-conceit. "For why," a man
says, "do I not know the beautiful and the ugly? Have I not the notion of it?"
You have. "Do I not adapt it to particulars?" You do. "Do I not then adapt it
properly?" In that lies the whole question; and conceit is added here. For,
beginning from these things which are admitted, men proceed to that which is
matter of dispute by means of unsuitable adaptation; for if they possessed this
power of adaptation in addition to those things, what would hinder them from
being perfect? But now since you think that you properly adapt the
preconceptions to the particulars, tell me whence you derive this. Because I
think so. But it does not seem so to another, and he thinks that he also makes
a proper adaptation; or does he not think so? He does think so. Is it possible
then that both of you can properly apply the preconceptions to things about
which you have contrary opinions? It is not possible. Can you then show us
anything better toward adapting the preconceptions beyond your thinking that
you do? Does the madman do any other things than the things as in which seem to
him right? Is then this criterion for him also? It is not sufficient. Come then
to something which is superior to seeming. What is this?
    Observe, this is the beginning of philosophy, a perception of the
disagreement of men with one another, and an inquiry into the cause of the
disagreement, and a condemnation and distrust of that which only "seems," and a
certain investigation of that which "seems" whether it "seems" rightly, and a
discovery of some rule, as we have discovered a balance in the determination of
weights, and a carpenter's rule in the case of straight and crooked things.
This is the beginning of philosophy. "Must we say that all thins are right
which seem so to all?" And how is it possible that contradictions can be right?
"Not all then, but all which seem to us to be right." How more to you than
those which seem right to the Syrians? why more than what seem right to the
Egyptians? why more than what seems right to me or to any other man? "Not at
all more." What then "seems" to every man is not sufficient for determining
what "is"; for neither in the case of weights or measures are we satisfied with
the bare appearance, but in each case we have discovered a certain rule. In
this matter then is there no rule certain to what "seems?" And how is it
possible that the most necessary things among men should have no sign, and be
incapable of being discovered? There is then some rule. And why then do we not
seek the rule and discover it, and afterward use it without varying from it,
not even stretching out the finger without it? For this, I think, is that which
when it is discovered cures of their madness those who use mere "seeming" as a
measure, and misuse it; so that for the future proceeding from certain things
known and made clear we may use in the case of particular things the
preconceptions which are distinctly fixed.
    What is the matter presented to us about which we are inquiring?
"Pleasure." Subject it to the rule, throw it into the balance. Ought the good
to be such a thing that it is fit that we have confidence in it? "Yes." And in
which we ought to confide? "It ought to be." Is it fit to trust to anything
which is insecure? "No." Is then pleasure anything secure? "No." Take it then
and throw it out of the scale, and drive it far away from the place of good
things. But if you are not sharp-sighted, and one balance is not enough for
you, bring another. Is it fit to be elated over what is good? "Yes." Is it
proper then to be elated over present pleasure? See that you do not say that it
is proper; but if you do, I shall then not think you are worthy even of the
balance. Thus things are tested and weighed when the rules are ready. And to
philosophize is this, to examine and confirm the rules; and then to use them
when they are known is the act of a wise and good man.

Of disputation or discussion

    What things a man must learn in order to be able to apply the art of
disputation, has been accurately shown by our philosophers; but with respect to
the proper use of the things, we are entirely without practice. Only give to
any of us, whom you please, an illiterate man to discuss with,, and he cannot
discover how to deal with the man. But when he has moved the man a little, if
he answers beside the purpose, he does not know how to treat him, but he then
either abuses or ridicules him, and says, "He is an illiterate man; it is not
possible to do anything with him." Now a guide, when he has found a man out of
the road leads him into the right way: he does not ridicule or abuse him and
then leave him. Do you also show this illiterate man the truth, and you will
see that he follows. But so long as you do not show him the truth, do not
ridicule him, but rather feel your own incapacity.
    How then did Socrates act? He used to compel his adversary in disputation
to bear testimony to him, and he wanted no other witness. Therefore he could
say, "I care not for other witnesses, but I am always satisfied with the
evidence of my adversary, and I do not ask the opinion of others, but only the
opinion of him who is disputing with me." For he used to make the conclusions
drawn from natural notions so plain that every man saw the contradiction and
withdrew from it: "Does the envious man rejoice?" "By no means, but he is
rather pained." Well, "Do you think that envy is pain over evils? and what envy
is there of evils?" Therefore he made his adversary say that envy is pain over
good things. "Well then, would any man envy those who are nothing to him?" "By
no means." Thus having completed the notion and distinctly fixed it he would go
away without saying to his adversary, "Define to me envy"; and if the adversary
had defined envy, he did not say, "You have defined it badly, for the terms of
the definition do not correspond to the thing defined." These are technical
terms, and for this reason disagreeable and hardly intelligible to illiterate
men, which terms we cannot lay aside. But that the illiterate man himself, who
follows the appearances presented to him, should be able to concede anything or
reject it, we can never by the use of these terms move him to do. Accordingly,
being conscious of our own inability, we do not attempt the thing; at least
such of us as have any caution do not. But the greater part and the rash, when
they enter into such disputations, confuse themselves and confuse others; and
finally abusing their adversaries and abused by them, they walk away.
    Now this was the first and chief peculiarity of Socrates, never to be
irritated in argument, never to utter anything abusive, anything insulting, but
to bear with abusive persons and to put an end to the quarrel. If you would
know what great power he had in this way, read the Symposium of Xenophon, and
you will see how many quarrels he put an end to. Hence with good reason in the
poets also this power is most highly praised,
       Quickly with the skill he settles great disputes.
    Well then; the matter is not now very safe, and particularly at Rome; for
he who attempts to do it, must not do it in a corner, you may be sure, but must
go to a man of consular rank, if it so happen, or to a rich man, and ask him,
"Can you tell me, Sir, to whose care you have entrusted your horses?" "I can
tell you." Here you entrusted them to a person indifferently and to one who has
no experience of horses? "By no means." Well then; can you tell me to whom you
entrust your gold or silver things or your vestments? "I don't entrust even
these to anyone indifferently." Well; your own body, have you already
considered about entrusting the care of it to any person? "Certainly." To a man
of experience, I suppose, and one acquainted with the aliptic, or with the
healing art? "Without a doubt." Are these the best things that you have, or do
you also possess something else which is better than all these? "What kind of
thing do you mean?" That I mean which makes use of these things, and tests each
of these things and deliberates. "Is it the soul that you mean?" You think
right, for it is the soul that I mean. "In truth I do think the soul is a much
better thing than all the others which I possess." Can you then show us in what
way you have taken care of the soul? for it is not likely that you, who are so
wise a man and have a reputation in the city, inconsiderately and carelessly
allow the most valuable thing that you possess to be neglected and to perish?
"Certainly not." But have you taken care of the soul yourself; and have you
learned from another to do this, or have you discovered the means yourself?
Here comes the danger that in the first place he may say, "What is this to you,
my good man, who are you?" Next, if you persist in troubling him, there is a
danger that he may raise his hands and give you blows. I was once myself also
an admirer of this mode of instruction until I fell into these dangers.


On anxiety

    When I see a man anxious, I say, "What does this man want? If he did not
want something which is not in his power, how could he be anxious?" For this
reason a lute player when he is singing by himself has no anxiety, but when he
enters the theatre, he is anxious even if he has a good voice and plays well on
the lute; for he not only wishes to sing well, but also to obtain applause: but
this is not in his power. Accordingly, where he has skill, there he has
confidence. Bring any single person who knows nothing of music, and the
musician does not care for him. But in the matter where a man knows nothing and
has not been practiced, there he is anxious. What matter is this? He knows not
what a crowd is or what the praise of a crowd is. However he has learned to
strike the lowest chord and the highest; but what the praise of the many is,
and what power it has in life he neither knows nor has he thought about it.
Hence he must of necessity tremble and grow pale. I cannot then say that a man
is not a lute player when I see him afraid, but I can say something else, and
not one thing, but many. And first of all I call him a stranger and say, "This
man does not know in what part of the world he is, but though he has been here
so long, he is ignorant of the laws of the State and the customs, and what is
permitted and what is not; and he has never employed any lawyer to tell him and
to explain the laws." But a man does not write a will, if he does not does not
know how it ought to be written, or he employs a person who does know; nor does
he rashly seal a bond or write a security. But he uses his desire without a
lawyer's advice, and aversion, and pursuit, and attempt and purpose. "How do
you mean without a lawyer?" He does not know that he wills what is not allowed,
and does not will that which is of necessity; and he does not know either what
is his own or what is or what is another man's; but if he did know, he could
never be impeded, he would never be hindered, he would not be anxious. "How so?
" Is any man then afraid about things which are not evil? "No." Is he afraid
about things which are evils, but still so far within his power that they may
not happen? "Certainly he is not." If, then, the things which are independent
of the will are neither good nor bad, and all things which do depend on the
will are within our power, and no man can either take them from us or give them
to us, if we do not choose, where is room left for anxiety? But we are anxious
about our poor body, our little property, about the will of Caesar; but not
anxious about things internal. Are we anxious about not forming a false
opinion? No, for this is in my power. About not exerting our movements contrary
to nature? No, not even about this. When then you see a man pale, as the
physician says, judging from the complexion, this man's spleen is disordered,
that man's liver; so also say, this man's desire and aversion are disordered,
he is not in the right way, he is in a fever. For nothing else changes the
color, or causes trembling or chattering of the teeth, or causes a man to
       Sink in his knees and shift from foot to foot.
    For this reason when Zeno was going to meet Antigonus, he was not anxious,
for Antigonus had no power over any of the things which Zeno admired; and Zeno
did not care for those things over which Antigonus had power. But Antigonus was
anxious when he was going to meet Zeno, for he wished to please Zeno; but this
was a thing external. But Zeno did not want to please Antigonus; for no man who
is skilled in any art wishes to please one who has no such skill.
    Should I try to please you? Why? I suppose, you know the measure by which
one man is estimated by another. Have you taken pains to learn what is a good
man and what is a bad man, and how a man becomes one or the other? Why, then,
are you not good yourself? "How," he replies, "am I not good?" Because no good
man laments or roans or weeps, no good man is pale and trembles, or says, "How
will he receive me, how will he listen to me?" Slave, just as it pleases him.
Why do you care about what belongs to others? Is it now his fault if he
receives badly what proceeds from you? "Certainly." And is it possible that a
fault should be one man's, and the evil in another? "No." Why then are you
anxious about that which belongs to others? "Your question is reasonable; but I
am anxious how I shall speak to him." Cannot you then speak to him as you
choose? "But I fear that I may be disconcerted?" If you are going to write the
name of Dion, are you afraid that you would be disconcerted? "By no means."
Why? is it not because you have practiced writing the name? "Certainly." Well,
if you were going to read the name, would you not feel the same? and why?
Because every art has a certain strength and confidence in the things which
belong to it. Have you then not practiced speaking? and what else did you learn
in the school? Syllogisms and sophistical propositions? For what purpose? was
it not for the purpose of discoursing skillfully? and is not discoursing
skillfully the same as discoursing seasonably and cautiously and with
intelligence, and also without making mistakes and without hindrance, and
besides all this with confidence? "Yes." When, then, you are mounted on a horse
and go into a plain, are you anxious at being matched against a man who is on
foot, and anxious in a matter in which you are practiced, and he is not? "Yes,
but that person has power to kill me." Speak the truth then, unhappy man, and
do not brag, nor claim to be a philosopher, nor refuse to acknowledge your
masters, but so long as you present this handle in your body, follow every man
who is stronger than yourself. Socrates used to practice speaking, he who
talked as he did to the tyrants, to the dicasts, he who talked in his prison.
Diogenes had practiced speaking, he who spoke as he did to Alexander, to the
pirates, to the person who bought him. These men were confident in the things
which they practiced. But do you walk off to your own affairs and never leave
them: go and sit in a corner, and weave syllogisms, and propose them to
another. There is not in you the man who can rule a state.

To Naso

    When a certain Roman entered with his son and listened to one reading,
Epictetus said, "This is the method of instruction"; and he stopped. When the
Roman asked him to go on, Epictetus said: Every art, when it is taught, causes
labour to him who is unacquainted with it and is unskilled in it, and indeed
the things which proceed from the arts immediately show their use in the
purpose for which they were made; and most of them contain something attractive
and pleasing. For indeed to be present and to observe how a shoemaker learns is
not a pleasant thing; but the shoe is useful and also not disagreeable to look
at. And the discipline of a smith when he is learning is very disagreeable to
one who chances to be present and is a stranger to the art: but the work shows
the use of the art. But you will see this much more in music; for if you are
present while a person is learning, the discipline will appear most
disagreeable; and yet the results of music are pleasing and delightful to those
who know nothing of music. And here we conceive the work of a philosopher to be
something of this kind: he must adapt his wish to what is going on, so that
neither any of the things which are taking place shall take place contrary to
our wish, nor any of the things which do not take place shall not take place
when we wish that they should. From this the result is to those who have so
arranged the work of philosophy, not to fall in the desire, nor to fall in with
that which they would avoid; without uneasiness, without fear, without
perturbation to pass through life themselves, together with their associates
maintaining the relations both natural and acquired, as the relation of son, of
father, of brother, of citizen, of man, of wife, of neighbour, of
fellow-traveler, of ruler, of ruled. The work of a philosopher we conceive to
be something like this. It remains next to inquire how this must be
accomplished.
    We see then that the carpenter when he has learned certain things becomes a
carpenter; the pilot by learning certain things becomes a pilot. May it not,
then, in philosophy also not be sufficient to wish to be wise and good, and
that there is also a necessity to learn certain things? We inquire then what
these things are. The philosophers say that we ought first to learn that there
is a God and that he provides for all things; also that it is not possible to
conceal from him our acts, or even our intentions and thoughts. The next thing,
is to learn what is the nature of the Gods; for such as they are discovered to
be, he, who would please and obey them, must try with all his power to be like
them. If the divine is faithful, man also must be faithful; if it is free, man
also must be free; if beneficent, man also must be beneficent; if magnanimous,
man also must be magnanimous; as being, then an imitator of God, he must do and
say everything consistently with this fact.
    "With what then must we begin?" If you will enter on the discussion, I will
tell you that you must first understand names. "So, then, you say that I do not
now understand names?" You do not understand them. "How, then, do I use them?"
Just as the illiterate use written language, as cattle use appearances: for use
is one thing, understanding is another. But if you think that you understand
them, produce whatever word you please, and let us try whether we understand
it. But it is a disagreeable thing for a man to be confuted who is now old and,
it may be, has now served his three campaigns. I too know this: for now you are
come to me as if you were in want of nothing: and what could you even imagine
to be wanting to you? You are rich, you have children, and a wife, perhaps and
many slaves: Caesar knows you, in Rome you have many friends, you render their
dues to all, you know how to requite him who does you a favour, and to repay in
the same kind him who does a wrong. What do you lack? If, then, I shall show
you that you lack the things most necessary and the chief things for happiness,
and that hitherto you have looked after everything rather than what you ought,
and, to crown all, that you neither know what God is nor what man is, nor what
is good nor what is bad; and as to what I have said about your ignorance of
other matters, that may perhaps be endured, but if I say that you know nothing
about yourself, how is it possible that you should endure me and bear the proof
and stay here? It is not possible; but you immediately go off in bad humour.
And yet what harm have I done you? unless the mirror also injures the ugly man
because it shows him to himself such as he is; unless the physician also is
supposed to insult the sick man, when he says to him, "Man, do you think that
you ail nothing? But you have a fever: go without food to-day; drink water."
And no one says, "What an insult!" But if you say to a man, "Your desires are
inflamed, your aversions are low, your intentions are inconsistent, your
pursuits are not comfortable to nature, your opinions are rash and false," the
man immediately goes away and says, "he has insulted me."
    Our way of dealing is like that of a crowded assembly. Beasts are brought
to be sold and oxen; and the greater part of the men come to buy and sell, and
there are some few who come to look at the market and to inquire how it is
carried on, and why, and who fixes the meeting and for what purpose. So it is
here also in this assembly: some like cattle trouble themselves about nothing
except their fodder. For to all of you who are busy about possessions and lands
and slaves and magisterial offices, these are nothing except fodder. But there
are a few who attend the assembly, men who love to look on and consider what is
the world, who governs it. Has it no governor? And how is it possible that a
city or a family cannot continue to exist, not even the shortest time without
an administrator and guardian, and that so great and beautiful a system should
be administered with such order and yet without a purpose and by chance? There
is then an administrator. What kind of administrator and how does he govern?
And who are we, who were produced by him, and for what purpose? Have we some
connection with him and some relation toward him, or none? This is the way in
which these few are affected, and then they apply themselves only to this one
thing, to examine the meeting and then to go away. What then? They are
ridiculed by the many, as the spectators at the fair are by the traders; and if
the beasts had any understanding, they would ridicule those who admired
anything else than fodder.

To or against those who obstinately persist in what they have determined

    When some persons have heard these words, that a man ought to be constant,
and that the will is naturally free and not subject to compulsion, but that all
other things are subject to hindrance, to slavery, and are in the power of
others, they suppose that they ought without deviation to abide by everything
which they have determined. But in the first place that which has been
determined ought to be sound. I require tone in the body, but such as exists in
a healthy body, in an athletic body; but if it is plain to me that you have the
tone of a frenzied man and you boast of it, I shall say to you, "Man, seek the
physician": this is not tone, but atony. In a different way something of the
same kind is felt by those who listen to these discourses in a wrong manner;
which was the case with one of my companions who for no reason resolved to
starve himself to death. I heard of it when it was the third day of his
abstinence from food and I went to inquire what had happened. "I have
resolved," he said. But still tell me what it was which induced you to resolve;
for if you have resolved rightly, we shall sit with you and assist you to
depart; but if you have made an unreasonable resolution, change your mind. "We
ought to keep to our determinations." What are you doing, man? We ought to keep
not to all our determinations, but to those which are right; for if you are now
persuaded that it is right, do not change your mind, if you think fit, but
persist and say, "We ought to abide by our determinations." Will you not make
the beginning and lay the foundation in an inquiry whether the determination is
sound or not sound, and so then build on it firmness and security? But if you
lay a rotten and ruinous foundation, will not your miserable little building
fall down the sooner, the more and the stronger are the materials which you
shall lay on it? Without any reason would you withdraw from us out of life a
man who is a friend, and a companion, a citizen of the same city, both the
great and the small city? Then, while you are committing murder and destroying
a man who has done no wrong, do you say that you ought to abide by your
determinations? And if it ever in any way came into your head to kill me, ought
you to abide by your determinations?
    Now this man was with difficulty persuaded to change his mind. But it is
impossible to convince some persons at present; so that I seem now to know,
what I did not know, before, the meaning of the common saying, "That you can
neither persuade nor break a fool." May it never be my lot to have a wise fool
for my friend: nothing is more untractable. "I am determined," the man says.
Madmen are also; but the more firmly they form a judgment on things which do
not exist, the more ellebore they require. Will you not act like a sick man and
call in the physician? "I am sick, master, help me; consider what I must do: it
is my duty to obey you." So it is here also: "I know not what I ought to do,
but I am come to learn." Not so; but, "Speak to me about other things: upon
this I have determined." What other things? for what is greater and more useful
than for you to be persuaded that it is not sufficient to have made your
determination and not to change it. This is the tone of madness, not of health.
"I will die, if you compel me to this." Why, man? What has happened? "I have
determined." I have had a lucky escape that you have not determined to kill me.
"I take no money." Why? "I have determined." Be assured that with the very tone
which you now use in refusing to take, there is nothing to hinder you at some
time from inclining without reason to take money and then saying, "I have
determined." As in a distempered body, subject to defluxions, the humor
inclines sometimes to these parts and then to those, so too a sickly soul knows
not which way to incline: but if to this inclination and movement there is
added a tone, then the evil becomes past help and cure.

Chapter 16

That we do not strive to use our opinions about good and evil

    Where is the good? In the will. Where is the evil? In the will. Where is
neither of them? In those things which are independent of the will. Well then?
Does any one among us think of these lessons out of the schools? Does any one
meditate by himself to give an answer to things as in the case of questions? Is
it day? "Yes." Is it night? "No." Well, is the number of stars even? "I cannot
say." When money is shown to you, have you studied to make the proper answer,
that money is not a good thing? Have you practiced yourself in these answers,
or only against sophisms? Why do you wonder then if in the cases which you have
studied, in those you have improved; but in those which you have not studied,
in those you remain the same? When the rhetorician knows that he has written
well, that he has committed to memory what he has written, and brings an
agreeable voice, why is he still anxious? Because he is not satisfied with
having studied. What then does he want? To be praised by the audience? For the
purpose, then, of being able to practice declamation, he has been disciplined:
but with respect to praise and blame he has not been disciplined. For when did
he hear from any one what praise is, what blame is, what the nature of each is,
what kind of praise should be sought, or what kind of blame should be shunned?
And when did he practice this discipline which follows these words? Why then do
you still wonder if, in the matters which a man has learned, there he surpasses
others, and in those in which he has not been disciplined, there he is the same
with the many. So the lute player knows how to play, sings well, and has a fine
dress, and yet he trembles when he enters on the stage; for these matters he
understands, but he does not know what a crowd is, nor the shouts of a crowd,
nor what ridicule is. Neither does he know what anxiety is, whether it is our
work or the work of another, whether it is possible to stop it or not. For this
reason, if he has been praised, he leaves the theatre puffed up, but if he has
been ridiculed, the swollen bladder has been punctured and subsides.
    This is the case also with ourselves. What do we admire? Externals. About
what things are we busy? Externals. And have we any doubt then why we fear or
why we are anxious? What, then, happens when we think the things which are
coming on us to be evils? It is not in our power not to be afraid, it is not in
our power not to be anxious. Then we say, "Lord God, how shall I not be
anxious?" Fool, have you not hands, did not God make them for you, Sit down now
and pray that your nose may not run. Wipe yourself rather and do not blame him.
Well then, has he given to you nothing in the present case? Has he not given to
you endurance? has he not given to you magnanimity? has he not given to you
manliness? When you have such hands, do you look for one who shall wipe your
you st nose? But we neither study these things nor care for them. Give me a man
who cares how he shall do anything, not for the obtaining of a thing but who
cares about his own energy. What man, when he is walking about, cares for his
own energy? who, when he is deliberating, cares about his own deliberation, and
not about obtaining that about which he deliberates? And if he succeeds, he is
elated and says, "How well we have deliberated; did I not tell you, brother,
that it is impossible, when we have thought about anything, that it should not
turn out thus?" But if the thing should turn out otherwise, the wretched man is
humbled; he knows not even what to say about what has taken place. Who among us
for the sake of this matter has consulted a seer? Who among us as to his
actions has not slept in indifference? Who? Give to me one that I may see the
man whom I have long been looking for, who is truly noble and ingenuous,
whether young or old; name him.
    Why then are we still surprised, if we are well practiced in thinking about
matters, but in our acts are low, without decency, worthless, cowardly,
impatient of labour, altogether bad? For we do not care about things, nor do we
study them. But if we had feared not death or banishment, but fear itself, we
should have studied not to fall into those things which appear to us evils. Now
in the school we are irritable and wordy; and if any little question arises
about any of these things, we are able to examine them fully. But drag us to
practice, and you will find us miserably shipwrecked. Let some disturbing
appearance come on us, and you will know what we have been studying and in what
we have been exercising ourselves. Consequently, through want of discipline, we
are always adding something to the appearance and representing things to be
greater than what they are. For instance as to myself, when I am on a voyage
and look down on the deep sea, or look round on it and see no land, I am out of
my mind and imagine that I must drink up all this water if I am wrecked, and it
does not occur to me that three pints are enough. What then disturbs me? The
sea? No, but my opinion. Again, when an earthquake shall happen, I imagine that
the city is going to fall on me; is not one little stone enough to knock my
brains out?
    What then are the things which are heavy on us and disturb us? What else
than opinions? What else than opinions lies heavy upon him who goes away and
leaves his companions and friends and places and habits of life? Now little
children, for instance, when they cry on the nurse leaving them for a short
time, forget their sorrow if they receive a small cake. Do you choose then that
we should compare you to little children? No, by Zeus, for I do not wish to be
pacified by a small cake, but by right opinions. And what are these? Such as a
man ought to study all day, and not to be affected by anything that is not his
own, neither by companion nor place nor gymnasia, and not even by his own body,
but to remember the law and to have it before his eyes. And what is the divine
law? To keep a man's own, not to claim that which belongs to others, but to use
what is given, and when it is not given, not to desire it; and when a thing is
taken away, to give it up readily and immediately, and to be thankful for the
time that a man has had the use of it, if you would not cry for your nurse and
mamma. For what matter does it make by what thing a man is subdued, and on what
he depends? In what respect are you better than he who cries for a girl, if you
grieve for a little gymnasium, and little porticoes and young men and such
places of amusement? Another comes and laments that he shall no longer drink
the water of Dirce. Is the Marcian water worse than that of Dirce? "But I was
used to the water of Dirce?" And you in turn will be used to the other. Then if
you become attached to this also, cry for this too, and try to make a verse
like the verse of Euripides,
       The hot baths of Nero and the Marcian water.
See how tragedy is made when common things happen to silly men.
    "When then shall I see Athens again and the Acropolis?" Wretch, are you not
content with what you see daily? have you anything better or greater to see
than the sun, the moon, the stars, the whole earth, the sea? But if indeed you
comprehend him who administers the Whole, and carry him about in yourself, do
you still desire small stones, and a beautiful rock? When, then, you are going
to leave the sun itself and the moon, what will you do? will you sit and weep
like children? Well, what have you been doing in the school? what did you hear,
what did you learn? why did you write yourself a philosopher, when you might
have written the truth; as, "I made certain introductions, and I read
Chrysippus, but I did not even approach the door of a philosopher." For how
should I possess anything of the kind which Socrates possessed, who died as he
did, who lived as he did, or anything such as Diogenes possessed? Do you think
that any one of such men wept or grieved, because he was not going to see a
certain man, or a certain woman, nor to be in Athens or in Corinth, but, if it
should so happen, in Susa or in Ecbatana? For if a man can quit the banquet
when he chooses, and no longer amuse himself, does he still stay and complain,
and does he not stay, as at any amusement, only so long as he is pleased? Such
a man, I suppose, would endure perpetual exile or to be condemned to death.
Will you not be weaned now, like children, and take more solid food, and not
cry after mammas and nurses, which are the lamentations of old women? "But if I
go away, I shall cause them sorrow." You cause them sorrow? By no means; but
that will cause them sorrow which also causes you sorrow, opinion. What have
you to do then? Take away your own opinion, and if these women are wise, they
will take away their own: if they do not, they will lament through their own
fault.
    My man, as the proverb says, make a desperate effort on behalf of
tranquillity of mind, freedom and magnanimity. Lift up your head at last as
released from slavery. Dare to look up to God and say, "Deal with me for the
future as thou wilt; I am of the same mind as thou art; I am thine: I refuse
nothing that pleases thee: lead me where thou wilt: clothe me in any dress thou
choosest: is it thy will that I should hold the office of a magistrate, that I
should be in the condition of a private man, stay there or be an exile, be
poor, be rich? I will make thy defense to men in behalf of all these
conditions. I will show the nature of each thing what it is." You will not do
so; but sit in an ox's belly, and wait for your mamma till she shall feed you.
Who would Hercules have been, if he had sat at home? He would have been
Eurystheus and not Hercules. Well, and in his travels through the world how
many intimates and how many friends had he? But nothing more dear to him than
God. For this reason it was believed that he was the son of God, and he was. In
obedience to God, then, he went about purging away injustice and lawlessness.
But you are not Hercules and you are not able to purge away the wickedness of
others; nor yet are you Theseus, able to pure away the evil things of Attica.
Clear away your own. From yourself, from your thoughts cast away, instead of
Procrustes and Sciron, sadness, fear, desire, envy, malevolence, avarice,
effeminacy, intemperance. But it is not possible to eject these things
otherwise than by looking to God only, by fixing your affections on him only,
by being consecrated to his commands. But if you choose anything else, you will
with sighs and groans be compelled to follow what is stronger than yourself,
always seeking tranquillity and never able to find it; for you seek
tranquillity there where it is not, and you neglect to seek it where it is.


How we must adapt preconceptions to particular cases

    What is the first business of him who philosophizes? To throw away
self-conceit. For it is impossible for a man to begin to learn that which he
thinks that he knows. As to things then which ought to be done and ought not to
be done, and good and bad, and beautiful and ugly, all of us talking of them at
random go to the philosophers; and on these matters we praise, we censure, we
accuse, we blame, we judge and determine about principles honourable and
dishonourable. But why do we go to the philosophers? Because we wish to learn
what we do not think we know. And what is this? Theorems. For we wish to learn
what philosophers say as being something elegant and acute; and some wish to
learn that they may get profit what they learn. It is ridiculous then to think
that a person wishes to learn one thing, and will learn another; or further,
that a man will make proficiency in that which he does not learn. But the many
are deceived by this which deceived also the rhetorician Theopompus, when he
blames even Plato for wishing everything to be defined. For what does he say?
"Did none of us before you use the words 'good' or 'just,' or do we utter the
sounds in an unmeaning and empty way without understanding what they severally
signify?" Now who tells you, Theopompus, that we had not natural notions of
each of these things and preconceptions? But it is not possible to adapt
preconceptions to their correspondent objects if we have not distinguished
them, and inquired what object must be subjected to each preconception. You may
make the same charge against physicians also. For who among us did not use the
words "healthy" and "unhealthy" before Hippocrates lived, or did we utter these
words as empty sounds? For we have also a certain preconception of health, but
we are not able to adapt it. For this reason one says, "Abstain from food";
another says, "Give food"; another says, "Bleed"; and another says, "Use
cupping." What is the reason? is it any other than that a man cannot properly
adapt the preconception of health to particulars?
    So it is in this matter also, in the things which concern life. Who among
us does not speak of good and bad, of useful and not useful; for who among us
has not a preconception of each of these things? Is it then a distinct and
perfect preconception? Show this. How shall I show this? Adapt the
preconception properly to the particular things. Plato, for instance, subjects
definitions to the preconception of the useful, but you to the preconception of
the useless. Is it possible then that both of you are right? How is it
possible? Does not one man adapt the preconception of good to the matter of
wealth, and another not to wealth, but to the matter of pleasure and to that of
health? For, generally, if all of us who use those words know sufficiently each
of them, and need no diligence in resolving, the notions of the preconceptions,
why do we differ, why do we quarrel, why do we blame one another?
    And why do I now allege this contention with one another and speak of it?
If you yourself properly adapt your preconceptions, why are you unhappy, why
are you hindered? Let us omit at present the second topic about the pursuits
and the study of the duties which relate to them. Let us omit also the third
topic, which relates to the assents: I give up to you these two topics. Let us
insist upon the first, which presents an almost obvious demonstration that we
do not properly adapt the preconceptions. Do you now desire that which is
possible and that which is possible to you? Why then are you hindered? why are
you unhappy? Do you not now try to avoid the unavoidable? Why then do you fall
in with anything which you would avoid? Why are you unfortunate? Why, when you
desire a thing, does it not happen, and, when you do not desire it, does it
happen? For this is the greatest proof of unhappiness and misery: "I wish for
something, and it does not happen." And what is more wretched than I?
    It was because she could not endure this that Medea came to murder her
children: an act of a noble spirit in this view at least, for she had a just
opinion what it is for a thing not to succeed which a person wishes. Then she
says, "Thus I shall be avenged on him who has wronged and insulted me; and what
shall I gain if he is punished thus? how then shall it be done? I shall kill my
children, but I shall punish myself also: and what do I care?" This is the
aberration of soul which possesses great energy. For she did not know wherein
lies the doing of that which we wish; that you cannot get this from without,
nor yet by the alteration and new adaptation of things. Do not desire the man,
and nothing which you desire will fall to happen: do not obstinately desire
that he shall live with you: do not desire to remain in Corinth; and, in a
word, desire nothing than that which God wills. And who shall hinder you? who
shall compel you? No man shall compel you any more than he shall compel Zeus.
    When you have such a guide, and your wishes and desires are the same as
his, why do you fear disappointment? Give up your desire to wealth and your
aversion to poverty, and you will be disappointed in the one, you will fall
into the other. Well, give them up to health, and you will be unfortunate: give
them up to magistracies, honours, country, friends, children, in a word to any
of the things which are not in man's power. But give them up to Zeus and to the
rest of the gods; surrender them to the gods, let the gods govern, let your
desire and aversion be ranged on the side of the gods, and wherein will you be
any longer unhappy? But if, lazy wretch, you envy, and complain, and are
jealous, and fear, and never cease for a single day complaining both of
yourself and of the gods, why do you still speak of being educated? What kind
of an education, man? Do you mean that you have been employed about sophistical
syllogisms? Will you not, if it is possible, unlearn all these things and begin
from the beginning, and see at the same time that hitherto you have not even
touched the matter; and then, commencing from this foundation, will you not
build up all that comes after, so that nothing, may happen which you do not
choose, and nothing shall fail to happen which you do choose?
    Give me one young man who has come to the school with this intention, who
is become a champion for this matter and says, "I give up everything else, and
it is enough for me if "t shall ever be in my power to pass my life free from
hindrance and free from trouble, and to stretch out my neck to all things like
a free man, and to look up to heaven as a friend of God, and fear nothing that
can happen." Let any of you point out such a man that I may "Come, young man,
into the possession of that which is your own, it is your destiny to adorn
philosophy: yours are these possessions, yours these books, yours these
discourses." Then when he shall have laboured sufficiently and exercised
himself in this of the matter, let him come to me again and say, "I desire to
be free from passion and free from perturbation; and I wish as a pious man and
a philosopher and a diligent person to know what is my duty to the gods, what
to my parents, what to my brothers, what to my country, what to strangers."
Come also to the second matter: this also is yours. "But I have now
sufficiently studied the second part also, and I would gladly be secure and
unshaken, and not only when I am awake, but also when I am asleep, and when I
am filled with wine, and when I am melancholy." Man, you are a god, you have
great designs.
    "No: but I wish to understand what Chrysippus says in his treatise of the
Pseudomenos." Will you not hang yourself, wretch, with such your intention? And
what good will it do you? You will read the whole with sorrow, and you will
speak to others trembling, Thus you also do. "Do you wish me, brother, to read
to you, and you to me?" "You write excellently, my man; and you also
excellently in the style of Xenophon, and you in the style of Plato, and you in
the style of Antisthenes." Then, having told your dreams to one another, you
return to the same things: your desires are the same, your aversions the same,
your pursuits are the same, and your designs and purposes, you wish for the
same things and work for the same. In the next place you do not even seek for
one to give you advice, but you are vexed if you hear such things. Then you
say, "An ill-natured old fellow: when I was going away, he did not weep nor did
he say, 'Into what danger you are going: if you come off safe, my child, I will
burn lights.' This is what a good-natured man would do." It will be a great
thing for you if you do return safe, and it will be worth while to burn lights
for such a person: for you ought to be immortal and exempt from disease.
    Casting away then, as I say, this conceit of thinking that we know
something useful, we I I must come to philosophy as we apply to geometry, and
to music: but if we do not, we shall not even approach to proficiency, though
we read all the collections and commentaries of Chrysippus and those of
Antipater and Archedemus.

Chapter 18

How we should struggle against appearances

    Every habit and faculty is maintained and increased by the corresponding
actions: the habit of walking by walking, the habit of running by running. If
you would be a good reader, read; if a writer, write. But when you shall not
have read thirty days in succession, but have done something else, you will
know the consequence. In the same way, if you shall have lain down ten days,
get up and attempt to make a long walk, and you will see how your legs are
weakened. Generally, then, if you would make anything a habit, do it; if you
would not make it a habit, do not do it, but accustom yourself to do something
else in place of it.
    So it is with respect to the affections of the soul: when you have been
angry, you must know that not only has this evil befallen you, but that you
have also increased the habit, and in a manner thrown fuel upon fire. When you
have been overcome in sexual intercourse with a person, do not reckon this
single defeat only, but reckon that you have also nurtured, increased your
incontinence. For it is impossible for habits and faculties, some of them not
to be produced, when they did not exist before, and others not be increased and
strengthened by corresponding acts.
    In this manner certainly, as philosophers say, also diseases of the mind
grow up. For when you have once desired money, if reason be applied to lead to
a perception of the evil, the desire is stopped, and the ruling faculty of our
mind is restored to the original authority. But if you apply no means of cure,
it no longer returns to the same state, but, being again excited by the
corresponding appearance, it is inflamed to desire quicker than before: and
when this takes place continually, it is henceforth hardened, and the disease
of the mind confirms the love of money. For he who has had a fever, and has
been relieved from it, is not in the same state that he was before, unless he
has been completely cured. Something of the kind happens also in diseases of
the soul. Certain traces and blisters are left in it, and unless a man shall
completely efface them, when he is again lashed on the same places, the lash
will produce not blisters but sores. If then you wish not to be of an angry
temper, do not feed the habit; throw nothing on it which will increase it: at
first keep quiet, and count the days on which you have not been angry. I used
to be in passion every day; now every second day; then every third, then every
fourth. But if you have intermitted thirty days, make a sacrifice to God. For
the habit at first begins to be weakened, and then is completely destroyed. "I
have not been vexed to-day, nor the day after, nor yet on any succeeding day
during two or three months; but I took care when some exciting things
happened." Be assured that you are in a good way. To-day when I saw a handsome
person, I did not say to myself, "I wish I could lie with her," and "Happy is
her husband"; for he who says this says, "Happy is her adulterer also." Nor do
I picture the rest to my mind; the woman present, and stripping herself and
lying down by my side. I stroke my head and say, "Well done, Epictetus, you
have solved a fine little sophism, much finer than that which is called the
master sophism." And if even the woman is willing, and gives signs, and sends
messages, and if she also fondle me and come close to me, and I should abstain
and be victorious, that would be a sophism beyond that which is named "The
Liar," and "The Quiescent." Over such a victory as this a man may justly be
proud; not for proposing, the master sophism.
    How then shall this be done? Be willing at length to be approved by
yourself, be willing to appear beautiful to God, desire to he in purity with
your own pure self and with God. Then when any such appearance visits you,
Plato says, "Have recourse to expiations, go a suppliant to the temples of the
averting deities." It is even sufficient if "you resort to the society of noble
and just men," and compare yourself with them, whether you find one who is
living or dead. Go to Socrates and see him lying down with Alcibiades, and
mocking his beauty: consider what a victory he at last found that he had gained
over himself; what an Olympian victory; in what number he stood from Hercules;
so that, by the Gods, one may justly salute him, "Hail, wondrous man, you who
have conquered not less these sorry boxers and pancratiasts nor yet those who
are like them, the gladiators." By placing these objects on the other side you
will conquer the appearance: you will not be drawn away by it. But, in the
first place, be not hurried away by the rapidity of the appearance, but say,
"Appearances, wait for me a little: let me see who you are, and what you are
about: let me put you to the test." And then do not allow the appearance to
lead you on and draw lively pictures of the things which will follow; for if
you do, it will carry you off wherever it pleases. But rather bring in to
oppose it some other beautiful and noble appearance and cast out this base
appearance. And if you are accustomed to be exercised in this way, you will see
what shoulders, what sinews, what strength you have. But now it is only
trifling words, and nothing more.
    This is the true athlete, the man who exercises himself against such
appearances. Stay, wretch, do not be carried away. Great is the combat, divine
is the work; it is for kingship, for freedom, for happiness, for freedom from
perturbation. Remember God: call on him as a helper and protector, as men at
sea call on the Dioscuri in a storm. For what is a greater storm than that
which comes from appearances which are violent and drive away the reason? For
the storm itself, what else is it but an appearance? For take away the fear of
death, and suppose as many thunders and lightnings as you please, and you will
know what calm and serenity there is in the ruling faculty. But if you have
once been defeated and say that you will conquer hereafter, then say the same
again, be assured that you at last be in so wretched a condition and so weak
that you will not even know afterward that you are doing wrong, but you will
even begin to make apologies for your wrongdoing, and then you will confirm the
saying of Hesiod to be true,
       With constant ills the dilatory strives.

    The argument called the "ruling argument" appears to have been proposed
from such principles as these: there is in fact a common contradiction between
one another in these three positions, each two being in contradiction to the
third. The propositions are, that everything past must of necessity be true;
that an impossibility does not follow a possibility; and that thing is possible
which neither is nor t at a t will be true. Diodorus observing this
contradiction employed the probative force of the first two for the
demonstration of this proposition, "That nothing is possible which is not true
and never will be." Now another will hold these two: "That something is
possible, which is neither true nor ever will be": and "That an impossibility
does not follow a possibility," But he will not allow that everything which is
past is necessarily true, as the followers of Cleanthes seem to think, and
Antipater copiously defended them. But others maintain the other two
propositions, "That a thing is possible which is neither true nor will he
true": and "That everything which is past is necessarily true"; but then they
will maintain that an impossibility can follow a possibility. But it is
impossible to maintain these three propositions, because of their common
contradiction. If then any man should ask me which of these propositions do I
maintain? I will answer him that I do not know; but I have received this story,
that Diodorus maintained one opinion, the followers of Panthoides, I think, and
Cleanthes maintained another opinion, and those of Chrysippus a third. "What
then is your opinion?" I was not made for this purpose, to examine the
appearances that occur to me and to compare what others say and to form an
opinion of my own on the thing. Therefore I differ not at all from the
grammarian. "Who was Hector's father?" Priam. "Who were his brothers?"
Alexander and Deiphobus. "Who was their mother?" Hecuba. I have heard this
story. "From whom?" From Homer. And Hellanicus also, I think, writes about the
same things, and perhaps others like him. And what further have I about the
ruling argument? Nothing. But, if I am a vain man, especially at a banquet, I
surprise the guests by enumerating those who have written on these matters.
Both Chrysippus has written wonderfully in his first book about
"Possibilities," and Cleanthes has written specially on the subject, and
Archedemus. Antipater also has written not only in his work about
"Possibilities," but also separately in his work on the ruling argument. Have
you not read the work? "I have not read it." Read. And what profit will a man
have from it? he will be more trifling and impertinent than he is now; for what
else have you rained by reading it? What opinion have you formed on this
subject? none; but you will tell us of Helen and Priam, and the island of
Calypso which never was and never will be. And in this matter indeed it is of
no great importance if you retain the story, but have formed no opinion of your
own. But in matters of morality this happens to us much more than in these
things of which we are speaking.
    "Speak to me about good and evil." Listen:
       The wind from Ilium to Ciconian shores
       Brought me.
    "Of things some are good, some are bad, and others are indifferent. The
good then are the virtues and the things which partake of the virtues; the bad
are the vices, and the things which partake of them; and the indifferent are
the things which lie between the virtues and the vices, wealth, health, life,
death, pleasure, pain." Whence do you know this? "Hellanicus says it in his
Egyptian history"; for what difference does it make to say this, or to say that
"Diogenes has it in his Ethic," or Chrysippus or Cleanthes? Have you then
examined any of these things and formed an opinion of your own? Show how you
are used to behave in a storm on shipboard? Do you remember this division, when
the sail rattles and a man, who knows nothing of times and seasons, stands by
you when you are screaming and says, "Tell me, I ask you by the Gods, what you
were saying just now. Is it a vice to suffer shipwreck: does it participate in
vice?" Will you not take up a stick and lay it on his head? What have we to do
with you, man? we are perishing and you come to mock us? But if Caesar sent for
you to answer a charge, do you remember the distinction? If, when you are going
in, pale and trembling, a person should come up to you and say, "Why do you
tremble, man? what is the matter about which you are engaged? Does Caesar who
sits within give virtue and vice to those who go in to him?" You reply, "Why do
you also mock me and add to my present sorrows?" Still tell me, philosopher,
tell me why you tremble? Is it not death of which you run the risk, or a
prison, or pain of the body, or banishment, or disgrace? What else is there? Is
there any vice or anything which partakes of vice? What then did you use to say
of these things? "What have you to do with me, man? my own evils are enough for
me." And you say right. Your own evils are enough for you, your baseness, your
cowardice, your boasting which you showed when you sat in the school. Why did
you decorate yourself with what belonged to others? Why did you call yourself a
Stoic?
    Observe yourselves thus in your actions, and you will find to what sect you
belong. You will find that most of you are Epicureans, a few Peripatetics, and
those feeble. For wherein will you show that you really consider virtue equal
to everything else or even superior? But show me a Stoic, if you can. Where or
how? But you can show me an endless number who utter small arguments of the
Stoics. For do the same persons repeat the Epicurean opinions any worse? And
the Peripatetic, do they not handle them also with equal accuracy? who then is
a Stoic? As we call a statue Phidiac which is fashioned according to the art of
Phidias; so show me a man who is fashioned according to the doctrines which he
utters. Show me a man who is sick and happy, in danger and happy, dying and
happy, in exile and happy, in disgrace and happy. Show him: I desire, by the
gods, to see a Stoic. You cannot show me one fashioned so; but show me at least
one who is forming, who has shown a tendency to be a Stoic. Do me this favor:
do not grudge an old man seeing a sight which I have not seen yet. Do you think
that you must show me the Zeus of Phidias or the Athena, a work of ivory and
gold? Let any of you show me a human soul ready to think as God does, and not
to blame either God or man, ready not to be disappointed about anything, not to
consider himself damaged by anything, not to be angry, not to be envious, not
to be jealous; and why should I not say it direct? desirous from a man to
become a god, and in this poor mortal body thinking of his fellowship with
Zeus. Show me the man. But you cannot. Why then do you delude yourselves and
cheat others? and why do you put on a guise which does not belong to you, and
walk about being thieves and pilferers of these names and things which do not
belong to you?
    And now I am your teacher, and you are instructed in my school. And I have
this purpose, to make you free from restraint, compulsion, hindrance, to make
you free, prosperous, happy, looking to God in everything small and great. And
you are here to learn and practice these things. Why, then, do you not finish
the work, if you also have such a purpose as you ought to have, and if I, in
addition to the purpose, also have such qualification as I ought to have? What
is that which is wanting? When I see an artificer and material by him, I expect
the work. Here, then, is the artificer, here the material; what is it that we
want? Is not the thing, one that can be taught? It is. Is it not then in our
power? The only thing of all that is in our power. Neither wealth is in our
power, nor health, nor reputation, nor in a word anything else except the right
use of appearances. This is by nature free from restraint, this alone is free
from impediment. Why then do you not finish the work? Tell me the reason. For
it is either through my fault that you do not finish it, or through your own
fault, or through the nature of the thing. The thing itself is possible, and
the only thing in our power. It remains then that the fault is either in me or
in you, or, what is nearer the truth, in both. Well then, are you willing that
we begin at last to bring such a purpose into this school, and to take no
notice of the past? Let us only make a beginning. Trust to me, and you will
see.

    The propositions which are true and evident are of necessity used even by
those who contradict them: and a man might perhaps consider it to be the
greatest proof of a thing being evident that it is found to be necessary even
for him who denies it to make use of it at the same time. For instance, if a
man should deny that there is anything universally true, it is plain that he
must make the contradictory negation, that nothing is universally true. What,
wretch, do you not admit even this? For what else is this than to affirm that
whatever is universally affirmed is false? Again, if a man should come forward
and say: "Know that there is nothing that can be known, but all things are
incapable of sure evidence"; or if another say, "Believe me and you will be the
better for it, that a man ought not to believe anything"; or again, if another
should say, "Learn from me, man, that it is not possible to learn anything; I
tell you this and will teach you, if you choose." Now in what respect do these
differ from those? Whom shall I name? Those who call themselves Academics?
"Men, agree that no man agrees: believe us that no man believes anybody."
    Thus Epicurus also, when he designs to destroy the natural fellowship of
mankind, at the same time makes use of that which he destroys. For what does he
say? "Be not deceived men, nor be led astray, nor be mistaken: there is no
natural fellowship among rational animals; believe me. But those who say
otherwise, deceive you and seduce you by false reasons." What is this to you?
Permit us to be deceived. Will you fare worse, if all the rest of us are
persuaded that there is a natural fellowship among us, and that it ought by all
means to be preserved? Nay, it will be much better and safer for you. Man, why
do you trouble yourself about us? Why do you keep awake for us? Why do you
light your lamp? Why do you rise early? Why do you write so many books, that no
one of us may be deceived about the gods and believe that they take care of
men; or that no one may suppose the nature of good to be other than pleasure?
For if this is so, lie down and sleep, and lead the life of a worm, of which
you judged yourself worthy: eat and drink, and enjoy women, and ease yourself,
and snore. And what is it to you, how the rest shall think about these things,
whether right or wrong? For what have we to do with you? You take care of sheep
because they supply us with wool, and milk, and, last of all, with their flesh.
Would it not be a desirable thing if men could be lulled and enchanted by the
Stoics, and sleep and present themselves to you and to those like you to be
shorn and milked? For this you ought to say to your brother Epicureans: but
ought you not to conceal it from others, and particularly before everything to
persuade them that we are by nature adapted for fellowship, that temperance is
a good thing; in order that all things may be secured for you? Or ought we to
maintain this fellowship with some and not with others? With whom, then, ought
we to maintain it? With such as on their part also maintain it, or with such as
violate this fellowship? And who violate it more than you who establish such
doctrines?
    What then was it that waked Epicurus from his sleepiness, and compelled him
to write what he did write? What else was it than that which is the strongest
thing in men, nature, which draws a man to her own will though he be unwilling
and complaining? "For since," she says, "you think that there is no community
among mankind, write this opinion and leave it for others, and break your sleep
to do this, and by your own practice condemn your own opinions." Shall we then
say that Orestes was agitated by the Erinyes and roused from his deep sleep,
and did not more savage Erinyes and Pains rouse Epicurus from his sleep and not
allow him to rest, but compelled him to make known his own evils, as madness
and wine did the Galli? So strong and invincible is man's nature. For how can a
vine be moved not in the mariner of a vine, but in the manner of an olive tree?
or on the other hand how can an olive tree be moved not in the manner of an
olive tree, but in the manner of a vine? It is impossible: it cannot be
conceived. Neither then is it possible for a man completely to lose the
movements of a man; and even those who are deprived of their genital members
are not able to deprive themselves of man's desires. Thus Epicurus also
mutilated all the offices of a man, and of a father of a family, and of a
citizen and of a friend, but he did not mutilate human desires, for he could
not; not more than the lazy Academics can cast away or blind their own senses,
though they have tried with all their might to do it. What a shame is this?
when a man has received from nature measures and rules for the knowing of
truth, and does not strive to add to these measures and rules and to improve
them, but, just the contrary, endeavors to take away and destroy whatever
enables us to discern the truth?
    What say you philosopher? piety and sanctity, what do you think that they
are? "If you like, I will demonstrate that they are good things." Well,
demonstrate it, that our citizens may be turned and honor the deity and may no
longer be negligent about things of the highest value. "Have you then the
demonstrations?" I have, and I am thankful. "Since then you are well pleased
with them, hear the contrary: 'That there are no Gods, and, if there are, they
take no care of men, nor is there any fellowship between us and them; and that
this piety and sanctity which is talked of among most men is the lying of
boasters and sophists, or certainly of legislators for the purpose of
terrifying and checking wrong-doers.'" Well done, philosopher, you have done
something for our citizens, you have brought back all the young men to contempt
of things divine. "What then, does not this satisfy you? Learn now, that
justice is nothing, that modesty is folly, that a father is nothing, a son
nothing." Well done, philosopher, persist, persuade the young men, that we may
have more with the same opinions as you who say the same as you. From such you
an principles as those have grown our well-constituted states; by these was
Sparta founded: Lycurgus fixed these opinions in the Spartans by his laws and
education, that neither is the servile condition more base than honourable, nor
the condition of free men more honorable than base, and that those who died at
Thermopylae died from these opinions; and through what other opinions did the
Athenians leave their city? Then those who talk thus, marry and beget children,
and employ themselves in public affairs and make themselves priests and
interpreters. Of whom? of gods who do not exist: and they consult the Pythian
priestess that they may hear lies, and they repeat the oracles to others.
Monstrous impudence and imposture.
    Man what are you doing? are you refuting yourself every day; and will you
not give up these frigid attempts? When you eat, where do you carry your hand
to? to your mouth or to your eye? when you wash yourself, what do you go into?
do you ever call a pot a dish, or a ladle a spit? If I were a slave of any of
these men, even if I must be flayed by him dally, I would rack him. If he said,
"Boy, throw some olive-oil into the bath," I would take pickle sauce and pour
it down on his head. "What is this?" he would say. An appearance was presented
to me, I swear by your genius, which could not be distinguished from oil and
was exactly like it. "Here give me the barley drink," he says. I would fill and
carry him a dish of sharp sauce. "Did I not ask for the barley drink?" Yes,
master; this is the barley drink. "Take it and smell; take it and taste." How
do you know then if our senses deceive us? If I had three or four fellow-slaves
of the same opinion, I should force him to hang himself through passion or to
change his mind. But now they mock us by using all the things which nature
gives, and in words destroying them.
    Grateful indeed are men and modest, who, if they do nothing else, are daily
eating bread and yet are shameless enough to say, we do not know if there is a
Demeter or her daughter Persephone or a Pluto; not to mention that they are
enjoying the night and the day, the seasons of the year, and the stars, and the
sea, and the land, and the co-operation of mankind, and yet they are not moved
in any degree by these things to turn their attention to them; but they only
seek to belch out their little problem, and when they have exercised their
stomach to go off to the bath. But what they shall say, and about what things
or to what persons, and what their hearers shall learn from this talk, they
care not even in the least degree, nor do they care if any generous youth after
hearing such talk should suffer any harm from it, nor after he has suffered
harm should lose all the seeds of his generous nature: nor if we should give an
adulterer help toward being shameless in his acts; nor if a public peculator
should lay hold of some cunning excuse from these doctrines; nor if another who
neglects his parents should be confirmed in his audacity by this teaching. What
then in your opinion is good or bad? This or that? Why then should a man say
any more in reply to such persons as these, or give them any reason or listen
to any reasons from them, or try to convince them? By Zeus one might much
sooner expect to make certainties change their mind than those who are become
so deaf and blind to their own evils.


    Some things men readily confess, and other things they do not. No one then
will confess that he is a fool or without understanding; but, quite the
contrary, you will hear all men saying, "I wish that I had fortune equal to my
understanding." But readily confess that they are timid, and they say: "I am
rather timid, I confess; but to other respects you will not find me to
foolish." A man will not readily confess that he is intemperate; and that he is
unjust he will not confess at all. He will by no means confess that be is
envious or a busybody. Most men will confess that they are compassionate. What
then is the reason? The chief thing is inconsistency and confusion in the
things which relate to good and evil. But different men have different reasons;
and generally what they imagine to be base, they do not confess at all. But
they suppose timidity to be a characteristic of a good disposition, and
compassion also; but silliness to be the absolute characteristic of a slave.
And they do not at all admit the things which are offenses against society. But
in the case of most errors, for this reason chiefly, they are induced to
confess them, because they that there is something involuntary in them as in
timidity and compassion; and if a man confess that he is in any respect
intemperate, he alleges love as an excuse for what is involuntary. But men do
not imagine injustice to be at all There is also in jealousy, as they suppose,
something involuntary; and for this reason they confess to jealousy also.
    Living among such men, who are so confused so ignorant of what they say,
and of evils which they have or have not, and why they have them, or how they
shall be relieved of them, I think it is worth the trouble for a man to watch
constantly "Whether I also am one of them, what imagination I have about
myself, how I conduct myself, whether I conduct myself as a prudent man,
whether I conduct myself as a temperate man, whether I ever say this, that I
have been taught to be prepared for everything that may happen. Have I the
consciousness, which a man who knows nothing ought to have, that I know
nothing? Do I go to my teacher as men go to oracles, prepared to obey? or do I
like a sniveling boy go to my school to learn history and understand the books
which I did not understand before, and, if it should happen so, to explain them
also to others?" Man, you have had a fight in the house with a poor slave, you
have turned the family upside down, you have frightened the neighbours, and you
come to me as if you were a wise man, and you take your seat and judge how I
have explained some word, and how I have babbled whatever came into my head.
You come full of envy, and humbled, because you bring nothing from home; and
you sit during, the discussion thinking of nothing else than how your father is
disposed toward you and your brother. "What are they saying about me there? now
they think that I am improving, and are saying, 'He will return with all
knowledge.' I wish I could learn everything before I return: but much labour is
necessary, and no one sends me anything, and the baths at Nicopolis are dirty;
everything is bad at home, and bad here."
    Then they say, "No one gains any profit from the school." Why, who comes to
the school, who comes for the purpose of being improved? who comes to present
his opinions to he purified? who comes to learn what he is in want of? Why do
you wonder then if you carry back from the school the very things which you
bring into it? For you come not to lay aside or to correct them or to receive
other principles in place of them. By no means, nor anything like it. You
rather look to this, whether you possess already that for which you come. You
wish to prattle about theorems? What then? Do you not become greater triflers?
Do not your little theorems give you some opportunity of display? You solve
sophistical syllogisms. Do you not examine the assumptions of the syllogism
named "The Liar"? Do you not examine hypothetical syllogisms? Why, then, are
you still vexed if you receive the things for which you come to the school?
"Yes; but if my child die or my brother, or if I must die or be racked, what
good will these things do me?" Well, did you come for this? for this do you sit
by my side? did you ever for this light your lamp or keep awake? or, when you
went out to the walking-place, did you ever propose any appearance that had
been presented to you instead of a syllogism, and did you and your friends
discuss it together? Where and when? Then you say, "Theorems are useless." To
whom? To such as make a bad use of them. For eyesalves are not useless to those
who use them as they ought and when they ought. Fomentations are not useless.
Dumb-bells are not useless; but they are useless to some, useful to others. If
you ask me now if syllogisms are useful, I will tell you that they are useful,
and if you choose, I will prove it. "How then will they in any way be useful to
me?" Man, did you ask if they are useful to you, or did you ask generally? Let
him who is suffering from dysentery ask me if vinegar is useful: I will say
that it is useful. "Will it then be useful to me?" I will say, "No." Seek first
for the discharge to be stopped and the ulcers to be closed. And do you, O men,
first cure the ulcers and stop the discharge; be tranquil in your mind, bring
it free from distraction into the school, and you will know what power reason
has.

    What a man applies himself to earnestly, that he naturally loves. Do men
then apply themselves earnestly to the things which are bad? By no means. Well,
do they apply themselves to things which in no way concern themselves? Not to
these either. It remains, then, that they employ themselves earnestly only
about things which are good; and if they are earnestly employed about things,
they love such things also. Whoever, then, understands what is good, can also
know how to love; but he who cannot distinguish good from bad, and things which
are neither good nor bad from both, can he possess the power of loving? To
love, then, is only in the power of the wise.
    "How is this?" a man may say; am foolish, and yet love my child." I am
surprised indeed that you have begun by making the admission that you are
foolish. For what are you deficient in? Can you not make use of your senses? do
you not distinguish appearances? do you not use food which is suitable for your
body, and clothing and habitation? Why then do you admit that you are foolish?
It is in truth because you are often disturbed by appearances and perplexed,
and their power of persuasion often conquers you; and sometimes you think these
things to be good, and then the same things to be bad, and lastly neither good
nor bad; and in short you grieve, fear, envy, are disturbed, you are changed.
This is the reason why you confess that you are foolish. And are you not
changeable in love? But wealth, and pleasure and, in a word, things themselves,
do you sometimes think them to he good and sometimes bad? and do you not think
the same men at one time to be good, at another time bad? and have you not at
one time a friendly feeling toward them and at another time the feeling of an
enemy? and do you not at one time praise them and at another time blame them?
"Yes; I have these feelings also." Well then, do you think that he who has been
deceived about a man is his friend? "Certainly not." And he who has selected a
man as his friend and is of a changeable disposition, has he good-will toward
him? "He has not." And he who now abuses a man, and afterward admires him?
"This man also has no good-will to the other." Well then, did you never see
little dogs caressing and playing with one another, so that you might say there
is nothing more friendly? but, that you may know what friendship is, throw a
bit of flesh among them, and you will learn. Throw between yourself and your
son a little estate, and you will know how soon he will wish to bury you and
how soon you wish your son to die. Then you will change your tone and say,
"What a son I have brought up! He has long been wishing to bury me." Throw a
smart girl between you; and do you, the old man, love her, and the young one
will love her too, If a little fame intervene, or dangers, it will be just the
same. You will utter the words of the father of Admetus!
       Life gives you pleasure: and why not your father.
    Do you think that Admetus did not love his own child when he was little?
that he was not in agony when the child had a fever? that he did not often say,
"I wish I had the fever instead of the child?" then when the test (the thing)
came and was near, see what words they utter. Were not Eteocles and Polynices
from the same mother and from the same father? Were they not brought up
together, had they not lived together, drunk together, slept together, and
often kissed one another? So that, if any man, I think, had seen them, he would
have ridiculed the philosophers for the paradoxes which they utter about
friendship. But when a quarrel rose between them about the royal power, as
between dogs about a bit of meat, see what they say,
       Polynices: Where will you take your station before the towers?
       Eteocles: Why do you ask me this?
       Polynices: I place myself opposite and try to kill you.
       Eteocles: I also wish to do the same.
Such are the wishes that they utter.
    For universally, be not deceived, every animal is attached to nothing so
much as to its own interest. Whatever then appears to it an impediment to this
interest, whether this be a brother, or a father, or a child, or beloved, or
lover, it hates, spurns, curses: for its nature is to love nothing so much as
its own interest; this is father, and brother and kinsman, and country, and
God. When, then, the gods appear to us to be an impediment to this, we abuse
them and throw down their statues and burn their temples, as Alexander ordered
the temples of AEsculapius to be burned when his dear friend died.
    For this reason if a man put in the same place his interest, sanctity,
goodness, and country, and parents, and friends, all these are secured: but if
he puts in one place his interest, in another his friends, and his country and
his kinsmen and justice itself, all these give way being borne down by the
weight of interest. For where the "I" and the "Mine" are placed, to that place
of necessity the animal inclines: if in the flesh, there is the ruling power:
if in the will, it is there: and if it is in externals, it is there. If then I
am there where my will is, then only shall I be a friend such as I ought to be,
and son, and father; for this will he my interest, to maintain the character of
fidelity, of modesty, of patience, of abstinence, of active cooperation, of
observing my relations. But if I put myself in one place, and honesty in
another, then the doctrine of Epicurus becomes strong, which asserts either
that there is no honesty or it is that which opinion holds to be honest.
    It was through this ignorance that the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians
quarreled, and the Thebans with both; and the great king quarreled with Hellas,
and the Macedonians with both; and the Romans with the Getae. And still earlier
the Trojan war happened for these reasons. Alexander was the guest of Menelaus;
and if any man had seen their friendly disposition, he would not have believed
any one who said that they were not friends. But there was cast between them a
bit of meat, a handsome woman, and about her war arose. And now when you see
brothers to be friends appearing to have one mind, do not conclude from this
anything about their friendship, not even if they say it and swear that it is
impossible for them to be separated from one another. For the ruling principle
of a bad man cannot be trusted, it is insecure, has no certain rule by which it
is directed, and is overpowered at different times by different appearances.
But examine, not what other men examine, if they are born of the same parents
and brought up together, and under the same pedagogue; but examine this only,
wherein they place their interest, whether in externals or in the will. If in
externals, do not name them friends, no more than name them trustworthy or
constant, or brave or free: do not name them even men, if you have any
judgment. For that is not a principle of human nature which makes them bite one
another, and abuse one another, and occupy deserted places or public places, as
if they were mountains, and in the courts of justice display the acts of
robbers; nor yet that which makes them intemperate and adulterers and
corrupters, nor that which makes them do whatever else men do against one
another through this one opinion only, that of placing themselves and their
interests in the things which are not within the power of their will. But if
you hear that in truth these men think the good to be only there, where will
is, and where there is a right use of appearances, no longer trouble yourself
whether they are father or son, or brothers, or have associated a long time and
are companions, but when you have ascertained this only, confidently declare
that they are friends, as you declare that they are faithful, that they are
just. For where else is friendship than where there is fidelity, and modesty,
where there is a communion of honest things and of nothing else?
    "But," you may say, "such a one treated me with regard so long; and did he
not love me?" How do you know, slave, if he did not regard you in the same way
as he wipes his shoes with a sponge, or as he takes care of his beast? How do
you know, when you have ceased to be useful as a vessel, he will not throw you
away like a broken platter? "But this woman is my wife, and we have lived
together so long." And how long did Eriphyle live with Amphiaraus, and was the
mother of children and of many? But a necklace came between them. "And what is
a necklace?" It is the opinion about such things. That was the bestial
principle, that was the thing which broke asunder the friendship between
husband and wife, that which did not allow the woman to be a wife nor the
mother to be a mother. And let every man among you who has seriously resolved
either to be a friend himself or to have another for his friend, cut out these
opinions, hate them, drive them from his soul. And thus, first of all, he will
not reproach himself, he will not be at variance with himself, will not change
his mind, he will not torture himself. In the next place, to another also, who
is like himself, he will be altogether and completely a friend. But he will
bear with the man who is unlike himself, he will be kind to him, gentle, ready
to pardon on account of his ignorance, on account of his being mistaken in
things of the greatest importance; but he will be harsh to no man, being well
convinced of Plato's doctrine that every mind is deprived of truth unwillingly.
If you cannot do this, yet you can do in all other respects as friends do,
drink together, and lodge together, and sail together, and you may be born of
the same parents; for snakes also are: but neither will they be friends nor
you, so long as you retain these bestial and cursed opinions.

    Every man will read a book with more pleasure or even with more case, if it
is written in fairer characters. Therefore every man will also listen more
readily to what is spoken, if it is signified by appropriate and becoming
words. We must not say, then, that there is no faculty of expression: for this
affirmation is the characteristic of an impious and also of a timid man. Of an
impious man, because he undervalues the gifts which come from God, just as if
he would take away the commodity of the power of vision, or of hearing, or of
seeing. Has, then, God given you eyes to no purpose? and to no purpose has he
infused into them a spirit so strong and of such skillful contrivance as to
reach a long way and to fashion the forms of things which are seen? What
messenger is so swift and vigilant? And to no purpose has he made the
interjacent atmosphere so efficacious and elastic that the vision penetrates
through the atmosphere which is in a manner moved? And to no purpose has he
made light, without the presence of which there would be no use in any other
thing?
    Man, be neither ungrateful for these gifts nor yet forget the things which
are superior to them. But indeed for the power of seeing and hearing, and
indeed for life itself, and for the things which contribute to support it, for
the fruits which are dry, and for wine and oil give thanks to God: but remember
that he has given you something else better than all these, I mean the power of
using them, proving them and estimating the value of each. For what is that
which gives information about each of these powers, what each of them is worth?
Is it each faculty itself? Did you ever hear the faculty of vision saying
anything about itself? or the faculty of hearing? or wheat, or barley, or a
horse or a dog? No; but they are appointed as ministers and slaves to serve the
faculty which has the power of making use of the appearances of things. And if
you inquire what is the value of each thing, of whom do you inquire? who
answers you? How then can any other faculty be more powerful than this, which
uses the rest as ministers and itself proves each and pronounces about them?
for which of them knows what itself is, and what is its own value? which of
them knows when it ought to employ itself and when not? what faculty is it
which opens and closes the eyes, and turns them away from objects to which it
ought not to apply them and does apply them to other objects? Is it the faculty
of vision? No; but it is the faculty of the will. What is that faculty which
closes and opens the ears? what is that by which they are curious and
inquisitive, or, on the contrary, unmoved by what is said? is it the faculty of
hearing? It is no other than the faculty of the will. Will this faculty then,
seeing that it is amid all the other faculties which are blind and dumb and
unable to see anything else except the very acts for which they are appointed
in order to minister to this and serve it, but this faculty alone sees sharp
and sees what is the value of each of the rest; will this faculty declare to us
that anything else is the best, or that itself is? And what else does the do
when it is opened than see? But whether we ought to look on the wife of a
certain person, and in what manner, who tells us? The faculty of the will. And
whether we ought to believe what is said or not to believe it, and if we do
believe, whether we ought to be moved by it or not, who tells us? Is it not the
faculty of the will? But this faculty of speaking and of ornamenting words, if
there is indeed any such peculiar faculty, what else does it do, when there
happens to be discourse about a thing, than to ornament the words and arrange
them as hairdressers do the hair? But whether it is better to speak or to be
silent, and better to speak in this way or that way, and whether this is
becoming or not becoming and the season for each and the and the use, what else
tells us than the faculty of the will? Would you have it then to come forward
and condemn itself?
    "What then," it says, "if the fact is so, can that which ministers be
superior to that to which it ministers, can the horse be superior to the rider,
or the do, to the huntsman, or the instrument to the musician, or the servants
to the king?" What is that which makes use of the rest? The will. What takes
care of all? The will. What destroys the whole man, at one time by hunger, at
another time by hanging, and at another time by a precipice? The will. Then is
anything stronger in men than this? and how is it possible that the things
which are subject to restraint are stronger than that which is not What things
are naturally formed to hinder the faculty of vision? Both will and things
which do not depend on the faculty of the will. It is the same with the faculty
of hearing, with the faculty of speaking in like manner. But what has a natural
power of hindering the will? Nothing which is independent of the will; but only
the will itself, when it is perverted. Therefore this is alone vice or alone
virtue.
    Then being so great a faculty and set over all the rest, let it come
forward and tell us that the most excellent of all things is the flesh. Not
even if the flesh itself declared that it is the most excellent, would any
person bear that it should say this. But what is it, Epicurus, which pronounces
this, which wrote about "The End of our Being," which wrote on "The Nature of
Things," which wrote about the Canon, which led you to wear a beard, which
wrote when it was dying that it was spending the last and a happy day? Was this
the flesh or the will? Then do you admit that you possess anything superior to
this? and are you not mad? are you in fact so blind and deaf?
    What then? Does any man despise the other faculties I hope not. Does any
man say that there is no use or excellence in the speaking faculty? I hope not.
That would be foolish, impious, ungrateful toward God. But a man renders to
each thing its due value. For there is some use even in an ass, but not so much
as in an ox: there is also use in a dog, but not so much as in a slave: there
is also some use in a slave, but not so much as in citizens: there is also some
use in citizens, but riot so much as in magistrates. Not, indeed, because some
things are superior, must we undervalue the use which other things have. There
is a certain value in the power of speaking, but it is not so great as the
power of the will. When, then, I speak thus, let no man think that I ask you to
neglect the power of speaking, for neither do I ask you to neglect the eyes,
nor the ears nor the hands nor the feet nor clothing nor shoes. But if you ask
me, "What, then, is the most excellent of all things?" what must I say? I
cannot say the power of speaking, but the power of the will, when it is right.
For it is this which uses the other, and all the other faculties both small and
great. For when this faculty of the will is set right, a man who is not good
becomes good: but when it falls, a man becomes bad. It is through this that we
are unfortunate, that we are fortunate, that we blame one another, are pleased
with one another. In a word, it is this which if neglect it makes unhappiness,
and if we carefully look after it makes happiness.
    But to take away the faculty of speaking, and to say that there is no such
faculty in reality, is the act not only of an ungrateful man toward those who
gave it, but also of a cowardly man: for such a person seems to me to fear if
there is any faculty of this kind, that we shall not be able to despise it.
Such also are those who say that there is no difference between beauty and
ugliness. Then it would happen that a man would be affected in the same way if
he saw Thersites and if he saw Achilles; in the same way, if he saw Helen and
any other woman. But these are foolish and clownish notions, and the notions of
men who know not the nature of each thing, but are afraid, if a man shall see
the difference, that he shall immediately be seized and carried off vanquished.
But this is the great matter; to leave to each thing the power which it has,
and leaving to it this power to see what is the worth of the power, and to
learn what is the most excellent of all things, and to pursue this always, to
be diligent about this, considering t all other things of secondary value
compared with this, but yet, as far as we can, not neglecting all those other
things. For we must take care of the eyes also, not as if they were the most
excellent thing, but we must take care of them on account of the most excellent
thing, because it will not be in its true natural condition, if it does not
rightly use the other faculties, and prefer some things to others.
    What then is usually done? Men generally act as a traveler would do on his
way to his own country, when he enters a good inn, and being pleased with it
should remain there. Man, you have forgotten your purpose: you were not
traveling to this inn, but you were pass through it. "But this is a pleasant
inn." And how many other inns are pleasant? and how many meadows are pleasant?
yet only passing through. But your purpose is this, return to your country, to
relieve your kinsmen of anxiety, to discharge the duties of a citizen, to
marry, to beget children, to fill the usual magistracies. For you are not come
to select more pleasant places, but to live in these where you were born and of
which you were made a citizen. Something of the kind takes place in the matter
which we are considering. Since, by the aid of speech and such communication as
you receive here, you must advance to perfection, and purge your will, and
correct the faculty which makes use of the appearances of things; and since it
is necessary also for the teaching of theorems to be effected by a certain mode
of expression and with a certain variety and sharpness, some persons captivated
by these very things abide in them, one captivated by the expression, another
by syllogisms, another again by sophisms, and still another by some other inn
of the kind; and there they stay and waste away as if they were among Sirens.
    Man, your purpose was to make yourself capable of using conformably to
nature the appearances presented to you, in your desires not to be frustrated,
in your aversion from things not to fall into that which you would avoid, never
to have no luck, nor ever to have bad luck, to be free, not hindered, not
compelled, conforming yourself to the administration of Zeus, obeying it, well
satisfied with this, blaming no one, charging no one with fault, able from your
whole soul to utter these verses:
       "Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, too, Destiny."
Then having this purpose before you, if some little form of expression pleases
you, if some theorems please you, do you abide among them and choose t dwell o
well there, forgetting the things at home, and do you say, "These things are
fine"? Who says that they are not fine? but only as being a way home, as inns
are. For what hinders you from being an unfortunate man, even if you speak like
Demosthenes? and what prevents you, if you can resolve syllogisms like
Chrysippus, from being wretched, from sorrowing, from envying, in a word, from
being disturbed, from being unhappy? Nothing. You see then that these were
inns, worth nothing; and that the purpose before you was something else. When I
speak thus to some persons, they think that I am rejecting care about speaking,
or care about theorems. I am not rejecting this care, but I am rejecting the
abiding about these things incessantly and putting our hopes in them. If a man
by this teaching does harm to those who listen to him, reckon me too among
those who do this harm: for I am not able, when I see one thing which is most
excellent and supreme, to say that another is so, in order to please you.

    A certain person said to him: "Frequently I desired to hear you and came to
you, and you never gave me any answer: and now, if it is possible, I entreat
you to say something to me." Do you think, said Epictetus, that as there is an
art in anything else, so there is also an art in speaking, and that he who has
the art, will speak skillfully, and he who has not, will speak unskillfully? "I
do think so." He, then, who by speaking receives benefit himself and is able to
benefit others, will speak skillfully: but he who is rather damaged by speaking
and does damage to others, will he be unskilled in this art of speaking? And
you may find that some are damaged and others benefited by speaking. And are
all who hear benefited by what they hear? Or will you find that among them also
some are benefited and some damaged? "There are both among these also," he
said. In this case also, then, those who hear skillfully are benefited, and
those who hear unskillfully are damaged? He admitted this. Is there then a
skill in hearing also, as there is in speaking? "It seems so." If you choose,
consider the matter in this way also. The practice of music, to whom does it
belong? "To a musician." And the proper making of a statue, to whom do you
think that it belongs? "To a statuary." And the looking at a statue skillfully,
does this appear to you to require the aid of no art? "This also requires the
aid of art." Then if speaking properly is the business of the skillful man, do
you see that to hear also with benefit is the business of the skillful man? Now
as to speaking and hearing perfectly, and usefully, let us for the present, if
you please, say no more, for both of us are a long way from everything of the
kind. But I think that every man will allow this, that he who is going to hear
philosophers requires some amount of practice in hearing. Is it not so?
    Tell me then about what I should talk to you: about what matter are you
able to listen? "About good and evil." Good and evil in what? In a horse? "No."
Well, in an ox? "No." What then? In a man? "Yes." Do know then what a man is,
what the notion is that we have of him, or have we our ears in any degree
practiced about this matter? But do you understand what nature is? or can you
even in any degree understand me when I say, "I shall use demonstration to you?
" How? Do you understand this very thing, what demonstration is, or how
anything is demonstrated, or by what means; or what things are like
demonstration, but are not demonstration? Do you know what is true or what is
false? What is consequent on a thing, what is repugnant to a thing, or not
consistent, or inconsistent? But must I excite you to philosophy, and how?
Shall I show to you the repugnance in the opinions of most men, through which
they differ about things good and evil, and about things which are profitable
and unprofitable, when you know not this very thing, what repugnance is? Show
me then what I shall accomplish by discoursing with you; excite my inclination
to do this. As the grass which is suitable, when it is presented to a sheep,
moves its inclination to eat, but if you present to it a stone or bread, it
will not be moved to eat; so there are in us certain natural inclinations also
to speak, when the hearer shall appear to be somebody, when he himself shall
excite us: but when he shall sit by us like a stone or like grass, how can he
excite a man's desire? Does the vine say to the husbandman, "Take care of me?"
No, but the vine by showing in itself that it will be profitable to the
husbandman, if he does take care of it, invites him to exercise care. When
children are attractive and lively, whom do they not invite to play with them,
and crawl with them, and lisp with them? But who is eager to play with an ass
or to bray with it? for though it is small, it is still a little ass.
    "Why then do you say nothing to me?" I can only say this to you, that he
who knows not who he is, and for what purpose he exists, and what is this
world, and with whom he is associated, and what things are the good and the
bad, and the beautiful and the ugly, and who neither understands discourse nor
demonstration, nor what is true nor what is false, and who is not able to
distinguish them, will neither desire according to nature, nor turn away, nor
move upward, nor intend, nor assent, nor dissent, nor suspend his judgment: to
say all in a few words, he will go about dumb and blind, thinking that he is
somebody, but being nobody. Is this so now for the first time? Is it not the
fact that, ever since the human race existed, all errors and misfortunes have
arisen through this ignorance? Why did Agamemnon and Achilles quarrel with one
another? Was it not through not knowing what things are profitable and not
profitable? Does not the one say it is profitable to restore Chryseis to her
father, and does not the other say that it is not profitable? does not the one
say that he ought to take the prize of another, and does not the other say that
he ought not? Did they not for these reasons forget both who they were and for
what purpose they had come there? Oh, man, for what purpose did you come? to
gain mistresses or to fight? "To fight." With whom? the Trojans or the
Hellenes? "With the Trojans." Do you then leave Hector alone and draw your
sword against your own king? And do you, most excellent Sir, neglect the duties
of the king, you who are the people's guardian and have such cares; and are you
quarreling about a little girl with the most warlike of your allies, whom you
ought by every means to take care of and protect? and do you become worse than
a well-behaved priest who treats you these fine gladiators with all respect? Do
you see what kind of things ignorance of what is profitable does?
    "But I also am rich." Are you then richer than Agamemnon? "But I am also
handsome." Are you then more handsome than Achilles? "But I have also beautiful
hair." But had not Achilles more beautiful hair and gold-colored? and he did
not comb it elegantly nor dress it. "But I am also strong." Can you then lift
so great a stone as Hector or Ajax? "But I am also of noble birth." Are you the
son of a goddess mother? are you the son of a father sprung from Zeus? What
good then do these things do to him, when he sits and weeps for a girl? "But I
am an orator." And was he not? Do you not see how he handled the most skillful
of the Hellenes in oratory, Odysseus and Phoenix? how he stopped their mouths?
    This is all that I have to say to you; and I say even this not willingly.
"Why?" Because you have not roused me. For what must I look to in order to be
roused, as men who are expert in are roused by generous horses? Must I look to
your body? You treat it disgracefully. To your dress? That is luxurious. To
your behavior to your look? That is the same as nothing. When you would listen
to a philosopher, do not say to him, "You tell me nothing"; but only show
yourself worthy of hearing or fit for hearing; and you will see how you will
move the speaker.

    When one of those who were present said, "Persuade me that logic is
necessary," he replied: Do you wish me to prove this to you? The answer was,
"Yes." Then I must use a demonstrative form of speech. This was granted. How
then will you know if I am cheating you by argument? The man was silent. Do you
see, said Epictetus, that you yourself are admitting that logic is necessary,
if without it you cannot know so much as this, whether logic is necessary or
not necessary

    Every error comprehends contradiction: for since he who errs does not wish
to err, but to he right, it is plain that he does not do what he wishes. For
what does the thief wish to do? That which is for his own interest. If, then,
the theft is not for his interest, he does not do that which he wishes. But
every rational: soul is by nature offended at contradiction, and so long as it
does not understand this contradiction, it is not hindered from doing
contradictory things: but when it does understand the contradiction, it must of
necessity avoid the contradiction and avoid it as much as a man must dissent
from the false when he sees that a thing is false; but so long as this
falsehood does not appear to him, he assents to it as to truth.
    He, then, is strong in argument and has the faculty of exhorting and
confuting, who is able to show to each man the contradiction through which he
errs and clearly to prove how he does not do that which he wishes and does that
which he does not wish. For if any one shall show this, a man will himself
withdraw from that which he does; but so long as you do not show this, do not
be surprised if a man persists in his practice; for having the appearance of
doing right, he does what he does. For this reason Socrates, also trusting to
this power, used to say, "I am used to call no other witness of what I say, but
I am always satisfied with him with whom I am discussing, and I ask him to give
his opinion and call him as a witness, and through he is only one, he is
sufficient in the place of all." For Socrates knew by what the rational soul is
moved, just like a pair of scales, and that it must incline, whether it chooses
or not. Show the rational governing faculty a contradiction, and it will
withdraw from it; but if you do not show it, rather blame yourself than him who
is not persuaded.


    A certain young man a rhetorician came to see Epictetus, with his hair
dressed more carefully than was usual and his attire in an ornamental style;
whereupon Epictetus said: Tell me you do not think that some dogs are beautiful
and some horses, and so of all other animals. "I do think so," the youth
replied. Are not then some men also beautiful and others ugly? "Certainly." Do
we, then, for the same reason call each of them in the same kind beautiful, or
each beautiful for something peculiar? And you will judge of this matter thus.
Since we see a dog naturally formed for one thing, and a horse for another, and
for another still, as an example, a nightingale, we may generally and not
improperly declare each of them to be beautiful then when it is most excellent
according to its nature; but since the nature of each is different, each of
them seems to me to be beautiful in a different way. Is it not so? He admitted
that it was. That then which makes a dog beautiful, makes a horse ugly; and
that which makes a horse beautiful, makes a dog ugly, if it is true that their
natures are different. "It seems to be so." For I think that what makes a
pancratiast beautiful, makes a wrestler to be not good, and a runner to be most
ridiculous; and he who is beautiful for the Pentathlon, is very ugly for
wrestling. "It is so," said he. What, then, makes a man beautiful? Is that
which in its kind makes both a dog and a horse beautiful? "It is," he said.
What then makes a dog beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a dog. And
what makes a horse beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a horse. What
then makes a man beautiful? Is it not the possession of the excellence of a
man? And do you, then, if you wish to be beautiful, young man, labour at this,
the acquisition of human excellence. But what is this? Observe whom you
yourself praise, when you praise many persons without partiality: do you praise
the just or the unjust? "The just." Whether do you praise the moderate or the
immoderate? "The moderate." And the temperate or the intemperate? "The
temperate." If, then, you make yourself such a person, you will know that you
will make yourself beautiful: but so long as you neglect these things, you must
be ugly, even though you contrive all you can to appear beautiful.
    Further I do not know what to say to you: for if I say to you what I think,
I shall offend you, and you will perhaps leave the school and not return to it:
and if I do not say what I think, see how I shall be acting, if you come to me
to be improved, and I shall not improve you at all, and if you come to me as to
a philosopher, and I shall say nothing to you as a philosopher. And how cruel
it is to you to leave you uncorrected. If at any time afterward you shall
acquire sense, you will with good reason blame me and say, "What did Epictetus
observe in me that, when he saw me in such a plight coming to him in such a
scandalous condition, he neglected me and never said a word? did he so much
despair of me? was I not young? was I not able to listen to reason? and how
many other young men at this age commit many like errors? I hear that a certain
Polemon from being a most dissolute youth underwent such a great change. Well,
suppose that he did not think that I should be a Polemon; yet he might have set
my hair right, he might have stripped off my decorations, he might have stopped
me from plucking the hair out of my body; but when he saw me dressed like- what
shall I say?- he kept silent." I do not say like what; but you will say, when
you come to your senses and shall know what it is and what persons use such a
dress.
    If you bring this charge against me hereafter, what defense shall I make?
Why, shall I say that the man will not be persuaded by me? Was Laius persuaded
by Apollo? Did he and get drunk and show no care for the oracle? Well then, for
this reason did Apollo refuse to tell him the truth? I indeed do not know,
whether you will be persuaded by me or not; but Apollo knew most certainly that
Laius would not be persuaded and yet he spoke. But why did he speak? I say in
reply: But why is he Apollo, and why does he deliver oracles, and why has he
fixed himself in this place as a prophet and source of truth and for the
inhabitants of the world to resort to him? and why are the words "Know
yourself" written in front of the temple, though no person takes any notice of
them?
    Did Socrates persuade all his hearers to take care of themselves? Not the
thousandth part. But, however, after he had been placed in this position by the
deity, as he himself says, he never left it. But what does he say even to his
judges? "If you acquit me on these conditions that I no longer do that which I
do now, I will not consent and I will not desist; but I will go up both to
young and to old, and, to speak plainly, to every man whom I meet, and I will
ask the questions which I ask now; and most particularly will I do this to you
my fellow-citizens, because you are more nearly related to me." Are you so
curious, Socrates, and such a busybody? and how does it concern you how we act?
and what is it that you say? "Being of the same community and of the same kin,
you neglect yourself, and show yourself a bad citizen to the state, and a bad
kinsman to your kinsmen, and a bad neighbor to your neighbors." "Who, then are
you?" Here it is a great thing to say, "I am he whose duty it is to take care
of men; for it is not every little heifer which dares to resist a lion; but if
the bull comes up and resists him, say to the bull, if you choose, 'And who are
you, and what business have you here?'" Man, in every kind there is produced
something which excels; in oxen, in dogs, in bees, in horses. Do not then say
to that which excels, "Who, then, are you?" If you do, it will find a voice in
some way and say, "I am such a thing as the purple in a garment: do not expect
me to be like the others, or blame my nature that it has made me different from
the rest of men."
    What then? am I such a man? Certainly not. And are you such a man as can
listen to the truth? I wish you were. But however since in a manner I have been
condemned to wear a white beard and a cloak, and you come to me as to a
philosopher, I will not treat you in a cruel way nor yet as if I despaired of
you, but I will say: Young man, whom do you wish to make beautiful? In the
first place, know who you are and then adorn yourself appropriately. You are a
human being; and this is a mortal animal which has the power of using
appearances rationally. But what is meant by "rationally?" Conformably to
nature and completely. What, then, do you possess which is peculiar? Is it the
animal part? No. Is it the condition of mortality? No. Is it the power of using
appearances? No. You possess the rational faculty as a peculiar thing: adorn
and beautify this; but leave your hair to him who made it as he chose. Come,
what other appellations have you? Are you man or woman? "Man." Adorn yourself
then as man, not as woman. Woman is naturally smooth and delicate; and if she
has much hair (on her body), she is a monster and is exhibited at Rome among
monsters. And in a man it is monstrous not to have hair; and if he has no hair,
he is a monster; but if he cuts off his hairs and plucks them out, what shall
we do with him? where shall we exhibit him? and under what name shall we show
him? "I will exhibit to you a man who chooses to be a woman rather than a man."
What a terrible sight! There is no man who will not wonder at such a notice.
Indeed I think that the men who pluck out their hairs do what they do without
knowing what they do. Man what fault have you to find with your nature? That it
made you a man? What then? was it fit that nature should make all human
creatures women? and what advantage in that case would you have had in being
adorned? for whom would you have adorned yourself, if all human creatures were
women? But you are not pleased with the matter: set to work then upon the whole
business. Take away- what is its name?- that which is the cause of the hairs:
make yourself a woman in all respects, that we may not be mistaken: do not make
one half man, and the other half woman. Whom do you wish to please? The women?,
Please them as a man. "Well; but they like smooth men." Will you not hang
yourself? and if women took delight in catamites, would you become one? Is this
your business? were you born for this purpose, that dissolute women should
delight in you? Shall we make such a one as you a citizen of Corinth and
perchance a prefect of the city, or chief of the youth, or general or
superintendent of the games? Well, and when you have taken a wife, do you
intend to have your hairs plucked out? To please whom and for what purpose? And
when you have begotten children, will you introduce them also into the state
with the habit of plucking their hairs? A beautiful citizen, and senator and
rhetorician. We ought to pray that such young men be born among us and brought
up.
    Do not so, I entreat you by the Gods, young man: but when you have once
heard these words, go away and say to yourself, "Epictetus has not said this to
me; for how could he? but some propitious good through him: for it would never
have come into his thoughts to say this, since he is not accustomed to talk
thus with any person. Come then let us obey God, that we may not be subject to
his anger." You say, "No." But, if a crow by his croaking signifies anything to
you, it is not the crow which signifies, but God through the crow; and if he
signifies anything through a human voice, will he not cause the man to say this
to you, that you may know the power of the divinity, that he signifies to some
in this way, and to others in that way, and concerning the greatest things and
the chief he signifies through the noblest messenger? What else is it which the
poet says:
       For we ourselves have warned him, and have sent
       Hermes the careful watcher, Argus' slayer,
       The husband not to kill nor wed the wife.
    Was Hermes going to descend from heaven to say this to him? And now the
Gods say this to you and send the messenger, the slayer of Argus, to warn you
not to pervert that which is well arranged, nor to busy yourself about it, but
to allow a man to be a man, and a woman to be a woman, a beautiful man to be as
a beautiful man, and an ugly man as an ugly man, for you are not flesh and
hair, but you are will; and if your will beautiful, then you will be beautiful.
But up the present time I dare not tell you that you are ugly, for I think that
you are readier to hear anything than this. But see what Socrates says to the
most beautiful and blooming of men Alcibiades: "Try, then, to be beautiful."
What does he say to him? "Dress your hair and pluck the hairs from your legs."
Nothing of that kind. But "Adorn your will, take away bad opinions." "How with
the body?" Leave it as it is by nature. Another has looked after these things:
intrust them to him. "What then, must a man be uncleaned?" Certainly not; but
what you are and are made by nature, cleanse this. A man should be cleanly as a
man, a woman as a woman, a child as a child. You say no: but let us also pluck
out the lion's mane, that he may not be uncleaned, and the cock's comb for he
also ought to he cleaned. Granted, but as a cock, and the lion as a lion, and
the hunting dog as a hunting dog.

In what a man ought to be exercised who has made proficiency; and that we
                           neglect the chief things

    There are three things in which a man ought to exercise himself who would
be wise and good. The first concerns the desires and the aversions, that a man
may not fail to get what he desires, and that he may not fall into that which
he does not desire. The second concerns the movements (toward) and the
movements from an object, and generally in doing what a man ought to do, that
he may act according to order, to reason, and not carelessly. The third thing
concerns freedom from deception and rashness in judgement, and generally it
concerns the assents. Of these topics the chief and the most urgent is that
which relates to the affects; for an affect is produced in no other way than by
a failing to obtain that which a man desires or a falling into that which a man
would wish to avoid. This is that which brings in perturbations, disorders, bad
fortune, misfortunes, sorrows, lamentations and envy; that which makes men
envious and jealous; and by these causes we are unable even to listen to the
precepts of reason. The second topic concerns the duties of a man; for I ought
not to be free from affects like a statue, but I ought to maintain the
relations natural and acquired, as a pious man, as a son, as a father, as a
citizen.
    The third topic is that which immediately concerns those who are making
proficiency, that which concerns the security of the other two, so that not
even in sleep any appearance unexamined may surprise us, nor in intoxication,
nor in melancholy. "This," it may be said, "is above our power." But the
present philosophers neglecting the first topic and the second, employ
themselves on the third, using sophistical arguments, making conclusions from
questioning, employing hypotheses, lying. "For a man must," as it is said,
"when employed on these matters, take care that he is not deceived." Who must?
The wise and good man. This then is all that is wanting to you. Have you
successfully worked out the rest? Are you free from deception in the matter of
money? If you see a beautiful girl, do you resist the appearance? If your
neighbor obtains an estate by will, are you not vexed? Now is there nothing
else wanting to you except unchangeable firmness of mind? Wretch, you hear
these very things with fear and anxiety that some person may despise you, and
with inquiries about what any person may say about you. And if a man come and
tell you that in a certain conversation in which the question was, "Who is the
best philosopher," a man who was present said that a certain person was the
chief philosopher, your little soul which was only a finger's length stretches
out to two cubits. But if another who is present "You are mistaken; it is not
worth while to listen to a certain person, for what does he know? he has only
the first principles, and no more?" then you are confounded, you grow pale, you
cry out immediately, "I will show him who I am, that I am a great philosopher."
It is seen by these very things: why do you wish to show it by others? Do you
not know that Diogenes pointed out one of the sophists in this way by
stretching out his middle finger? And then when the man was wild with rage,
"This," he said, "is the certain person: I pointed him out to you." For a man
is not shown by the finger, as a stone or a piece of wood: but when any person
shows the man s principles, then he shows him as a man.
    Let us look at your principles also. For is it not plain that you value not
at all your own will, but you look externally to things which are independent
of your will? For instance, what will a certain person say? and what will
people think of you? will you be considered a man of learning; have you read
Chrysippus or Antipater? for if you have read Archedemus also, you have
everything. Why are you still uneasy lest you should not show us who you are?
Would you let me tell you what manner of man you have shown us that you are?
You have exhibited yourself to us as a mean fellow, querulous, passionate,
cowardly, finding fault with everything, blaming everybody, never quiet, vain:
this is what you have exhibited to us. Go away now and read Archedemus; then,
if a mouse should leap down and make a noise, you are a dead man. For such a
death awaits you as it did- what was the man's name?- Crinis; and he too was
proud, because he understood Archedemus.
    Wretch, will you not dismiss these things that do not concern you at all?
These things are suitable to those who are able to learn them without
perturbation, to those who can say: "I am not subject to anger, to grief, to
envy: I am not hindered, I am not restrained. What remains for me? I have
leisure, I am tranquil: let us see how we must deal with sophistical arguments;
let us see how when a man has accepted an hypothesis he shall not be led away
to anything absurd." To them such things belong. To those who are happy it is
appropriate to light a fire, to dine; if they choose, both to sing and to
dance. But when the vessel is sinking, you come to me and hoist the sails.

What is the matter on which a good man should he employed, and in what we ought
                         chiefly to practice ourselves

    The material for the wise and good man is his own ruling faculty: and the
body is the material for the physician and the aliptes; the land is the matter
for the husbandman. The business of the wise and good man is to use appearances
conformably to nature: and as it is the nature of every soul to assent to the
truth, to dissent from the false, and to remain in suspense as to that which is
uncertain; so it is its nature to be moved toward the desire of the good, and
to aversion from the evil; and with respect to that which is neither good nor
bad it feels indifferent. For as the money-changer is not allowed to reject
Caesar's coin, nor the seller of herbs, but if you show the coin, whether he
chooses or not, he must give up what is sold for the coin; so it is also in the
matter of the soul. When the good appears, it immediately attracts to itself;
the evil repels from itself. But the soul will never reject the manifest
appearance of the good, any more than persons will reject Caesar's coin. On
this principle depends every movement both of man and God.
    For this reason the good is preferred to every intimate relationship. There
is no intimate relationship between me and my father, but there is between me
and the good. "Are you so hard-hearted?" Yes, for such is my nature; and this
is the coin which God has given me. For this reason, if the good is something
different from the beautiful and the just, both father is gone, and brother and
country, and everything. But shall I overlook my own good, in order that you
may have it, and shall I give it up to you? Why? "I am your father." But you
are not my good. "I am your brother." But you are not my good. But if we place
the good in a right determination of the will, the very observance of the
relations of life is good, and accordingly he who gives up any external things
obtains that which is good. Your father takes away your property. But he does
not injure you. Your brother will have the greater part of the estate in land.
Let him have as much as he chooses. Will he then have a greater share of
modesty, of fidelity, of brotherly affection? For who will eject you from this
possession? Not even Zeus, for neither has he chosen to do so; but he has made
this in my own power, and he has given it to me just as he possessed it
himself, free from hindrance, compulsion, and impediment. When then the coin
which another uses is a different coin, if a man presents this coin, he
receives that which is sold for it. Suppose that there comes into the province
a thievish proconsul, what coin does he use? Silver coin. Show it to him, and
carry off what you please. Suppose one comes who is an adulterer: what coin
does he use? Little girls. "Take," a man says, "the coin, and sell me the small
thing." "Give," says the seller, "and buy." Another is eager to possess boys.
Give him the coin, and receive what you wish. Another is fond of hunting: give
him a fine nag or a dog. Though he groans and laments, he will sell for it that
which you want. For another compels him from within, he who has fixed this
coin.
    Against this kind of thing chiefly a man should exercise himself. As soon
as you go out in the morning, examine every man whom you see, every man whom
you hear; answer as to a question, "What have you seen?" A handsome man or
woman? Apply the rule: Is this independent of the will, or dependent?
Independent. Take it away. What have you seen? A man lamenting over the death
of a child. Apply the rule. Death is a thing independent of the will. Take it
away. Has the proconsul met you? Apply the rule. What kind of thing is a
proconsul's office? Independent of the will, or dependent on it? Independent.
Take this away also: it does not stand examination: cast it away: it is nothing
to you.
    If we practiced this and exercised ourselves in it daily from morning to
night, something indeed would be done. But now we are forthwith caught
half-asleep by every appearance, and it is only, if ever, that in the school we
are roused a little. Then when we go out, if we see a man lamenting, we say,
"He is undone." If we see a consul, we say, "He is happy." If we see an exiled
man, we say, "He is miserable." If we see a poor man, we say, "He is wretched:
he has nothing to eat."
    We ought then to eradicate these bad opinions, and to this end we should
direct all our efforts. For what is weeping and lamenting? Opinion. What is bad
fortune? Opinion. What is civil sedition, what is divided opinion, what is
blame, what is accusation, what is impiety, what is trifling? All these things
are opinions, and nothing more, and opinions about things independent of the
will, as if they were good and bad. Let a man transfer these opinions to things
dependent on the will, and I engage for him that he will be firm and constant,
whatever may be the state of things around him. Such as is a dish of water,
such is the soul. Such as is the ray of light which falls on the water, such
are the appearances. When the water is moved, the ray also seems to be moved,
yet it is not moved. And when, then, a man is seized with giddiness, it is not
the arts and the virtues which are confounded, but the spirit on which they are
impressed; but if the spirit be restored to its settled state, those things
also are restored.


Against a person who showed his partisanship in an unseemly way in a theatre

    The governor of Epirus having shown his favor to an actor in an unseemly
way and being publicly blamed on this account, and afterward having reported to
Epictetus that he was blamed and that he was vexed at those who blamed him,
Epictetus said: What harm have they been doing? These men also were acting, as
partisans, as you were doing. The governor replied, "Does, then, any person
show his partisanship in this way?" When they see you, said Epictetus, who are
their governor, a friend of Caesar and his deputy, showing partisanship in this
way, was it not to be expected that they also should show their partisanship in
the same way? for if it is not right to show partisanship in this way, do not
do so yourself; and if it is right, why are you angry if they followed your
example? For whom have the many to imitate except you, who are their superiors,
to whose example should they look when they go to the theatre except yours?
"See how the deputy of Caesar looks on: he has cried out, and I too, then, will
cry out. He springs up from his seat, and I will spring up. His slaves sit in
various parts of the theatre and call out. I have no slaves, but I will myself
cry out as much as I can and as loud as all of them together." You ought then
to know when you enter the theatre that you enter as a rule and example to the
rest how they ought to look at the acting. Why then did they blame you? Because
every man hates that which is a hindrance to him. They wished one person to be
crowned; you wished another. They were a hindrance to you, and you were a
hindrance to them. You were found to be the stronger; and they did what they
could; they blamed that which hindered them. What, then, would you have? That
you should do what you please, and they should not even say what they please?
And what is the wonder? Do not the husbandmen abuse Zeus when they are hindered
by him? do not the sailors abuse him? do they ever cease abusing Caesar? What
then does not Zeus know? is not what is said reported to Caesar? What, then,
does he do? he knows that, if he punished all who abuse him, he would have
nobody to rule over. What then? when you enter the theatre, you ought to say
not, "Let Sophron be crowned", but you ought to say this, "Come let me maintain
my will in this matter so that it shall be conformable to nature: no man is
dearer to me than myself. It would be ridiculous, then, for me to be hurt
(injured) in order that another who is an actor may be crowned." Whom then do I
wish to gain the prize? Why the actor who does gain the prize; and so he will
always gain the prize whom I wish to gain it. "But I wish Sophron to be
crowned." Celebrate as many games as you choose in your own house, Nemean,
Pythian, Isthmian, Olympian, and proclaim him victor. But in public do not
claim more than your due, nor attempt to appropriate to yourself what belongs
to all. If you do not consent to this, bear being abused: for when you do the
same as the many, you put yourself on the same level with them.


Against those who on account of sickness go away home

    "I am sick here," said one of the pupils, "and I wish to return home." At
home, I suppose, you free from sickness. Do you not consider whether you are
doing, anything here which may be useful to the exercise of your will, that it
may be corrected? For if you are doing nothing toward this end, it was to no
purpose that you came. Go away. Look after your affairs at home. For if your
ruling power cannot be maintained in a state conformable to nature, it is
possible that your land can, that you will he able to increase your money, you
will take care of your father in his old age, frequent the public place, hold
magisterial office: being bad you will do badly anything else that you have to
do. But if you understand yourself, and know that you are casting away certain
bad opinions and adopting others in their place, and if you have changed your
state of life from things which are not within your will to things which are
within your will, and if you ever say, "Alas!" you are not saying what you say
on account of your father, or your brother, but on account of yourself, do you
still allege your sickness? Do you not know that both disease and death must
surprise us while we are doing something? the husbandman while he is tilling
the ground, the sailor while he is on his voyage? what would you be doing when
death surprises you, for you must be surprised when you are doing something? If
you can be doing anything better than this when you are surprised, do it. For I
wish to be surprised by disease or death when I am looking after nothing else
than my that may be free from perturbation, own will that I may be free from
hindrance, free from compulsion, and in a state of liberty. I wish to be found
practicing these things that I may be able to say to God, "Have I in any
respect transgressed thy commands? have I in any respect wrongly used the
powers which Thou gavest me? have I misused my perceptions or my
preconceptions? have I ever blamed Thee? have I ever found fault with Thy
administration? I have been sick, because it was Thy will, and so have others,
but I was content to be sick. I have been poor because it was Thy will, but I
was content also. I have not filled a magisterial office, because it was not
Thy pleasure that I should: I have never desired it. Hast Thou ever seen me for
this reason discontented? have I not always approached Thee with a cheerful
countenance, ready to do Thy commands and to obey Thy signals? Is it now Thy
will that I should depart from the assemblage of men? I depart. I give Thee all
thanks that Thou hast allowed me to join in this Thy assemblage of men and to
see Thy works, and to comprehend this Thy administration." May death surprise
me while I am thinking of these things, while I am thus writing and reading.
    "But my mother will not hold my head when I am sick." Go to your mother
then; for you are a fit person to have your head held when you are sick. "But
at home I used to lie down on a delicious bed." Go away to your bed: indeed you
are fit to lie on such a bed even when you are in health: do not, then, lose
what you can do there.
    But what does Socrates say? "As one man," he says, "is pleased with
improving his land, another with improving his horse, so I am daily pleased in
observing that I am growing better." "Better in what? in using nice little
words?" Man, do not say that. "In little matters of speculation?" What are you
saying? "And indeed I do not see what else there is on which philosophers
employ their time." Does it seem nothing to you to have never found fault with
any person, neither with God nor man? to have blamed nobody? to carry the same
face always in going out and coming in? This is what Socrates knew, and yet he
never said that he knew anything or taught anything. But if any man asked for
nice little words or little speculations, he would carry him to Protagoras or
to Hippias; and if any man came to ask for pot-herbs, he would carry him to the
gardener. Who then among you has this purpose? for if indeed you had it, you
would both be content in sickness, and in hunger, and in death. If any among
you has been in love with a charming girl, he knows that I say what is true.


Miscellaneous

    When some person asked him how it happened that since reason has been more
cultivated by the men of the present age, the progress made in former times was
greater. In what respect, he answered, has it been more cultivated now, and in
what respect was the progress greater then? For in that in which it has now
been more cultivated, in that also the progress will now be found. At present
it has been cultivated for the purpose of resolving syllogisms, and progress is
made. But in former times it was cultivated for the purpose of maintaining the
governing faculty in a condition conformable to nature, and progress was made.
Do not, then, mix things which are different and do not expect, when you are
laboring at one thing, to make progress in another. But see if any man among us
when he is intent see I upon this, the keeping himself in a state conformable
to nature and living so always, does not make progress. For you will not find
such a man.
    The good man is invincible, for he does not enter the contest where he is
not stronger. If you want to have his land and all that is on it, take the
land; take his slaves, take his magisterial office, take his poor body. But you
will not make his desire fail in that which it seeks, nor his aversion fall
into that which he would avoid. The only contest into which he enters is that
about things which are within the power of his will; how then will he not be
invincible?
    Some person having asked him what is Common sense, Epictetus replied: As
that may be called a certain Common hearing which only distinguishes vocal
sounds, and that which distinguishes musical sounds is not Common, but
artificial; so there are certain things which men, who are not altogether
perverted, see by the common notions which all possess. Such a constitution of
the mind is named Common sense.
    It is not easy to exhort weak young men; for neither is it easy to hold
cheese with a hook. But those who have a good natural disposition, even if you
try to turn them aside, cling still more to reason. Wherefore Rufus generally
attempted to discourage, and he used this method as a test of those who had a
good natural disposition and those who had not. "For," it was his habit to say,
"as a stone, if you cast it upward, will be brought down to the earth by its
own nature, so the man whose mind is naturally good, the more you repel him,
the more he turns toward that to which he is naturally inclined."


To the administrator of the free cities who was an Epicurean

    When the administrator came to visit him, and the man was an Epicurean,
Epictetus said: It is proper for us who are not philosophers to inquire of you
who are philosophers, as those who come to a strange city inquire of the
citizens and those who are acquainted with it, what is the best thing in the
world, in order that we also, after inquiry, may go in quest of that which is
best and look at it, as strangers do with the things in cities. For that there
are three things which relate to man, soul, body, and things external, scarcely
any man denies. It remains for you philosophers to answer what is the best.
What shall we say to men? Is the flesh the best? and was it for this that
Maximus sailed as far as Cassiope in winter with his son, and accompanied him
that he might be gratified in the flesh? Then the man said that it was not, and
added, "Far be that from him." Is it not fit then, Epictetus said, to be
actively employed about the best? "It is certainly of all things the most fit."
What, then, do we possess which is better than the flesh? "The soul," he
replied. And the good things of the best, are they better, or the good things
of the worse? "The good things of the best." And are the good things of the
best within the power of the will or not within the power of the will? "They
are within the power of the will." Is, then, the pleasure of the soul a thing
within the power of the will? "It is," he replied. And on what shall this
pleasure depend? On itself? But that cannot be conceived: for there must first
exist a certain substance or nature of good, by obtaining which we shall have
pleasure in the soul. He assented to this also. On what, then, shall we depend
for this pleasure of the soul? for if it shall depend on things of the soul,
the substance of the good is discovered; for good cannot be one thing, and that
at which we are rationally delighted another thing; nor if that which precedes
is not good, can that which comes after be good, for in order that the thing
which comes after may be good, that which precedes must be good. But you would
not affirm this, if you are in your right mind, for you would then say what is
inconsistent both with Epicurus and the rest of your doctrines. It remains,
then, that the pleasure of the soul is in the pleasure from things of the body:
and again that those bodily things must be the things which precede and the
substance of the good.
    For this reason Maximus acted foolishly if he made the voyage for any other
reason than for the sake of the flesh, that is, for the sake of the best. And
also a man acts foolishly if he abstains from that which belongs to others,
when he is a judge and able to take it. But, if you please, let us consider
this only, how this thing may be done secretly, and safely, and so that no man
will know it. For not even does Epicurus himself declare stealing to be bad,
but he admits that detection is; and because it is impossible to have security
against detection, for this reason he says, "Do not steal." But I say to you
that if stealing is done cleverly and cautiously, we shall not be detected:
further also we have powerful friends in Rome both men and women, and the
Hellenes are weak, and no man will venture to go up to Rome for the purpose.
Why do you refrain from your own good? This is senseless, foolish. But even if
you tell me that you do refrain, I will not believe you. For as it is
impossible to assent to that which appears false, and to turn away from that
which is true, so it is impossible to abstain from that which appears good. But
wealth is a good thing, and certainly most efficient in producing pleasure. Why
will you not acquire wealth? And why should we not corrupt our neighbor's wife,
if we can do it without detection? and if the husband foolishly prates about
the matter, why not pitch him out of the house? If you would be a philosopher
such as you ought to be, if a perfect philosopher, if consistent with your own
doctrines. If you would not, you will not differ at all from us who are called
Stoics; for we also say one thing, but we do another: we talk of the things
which are beautiful, but we do what is base. But you will be perverse in the
contrary way, teaching what is bad, practicing what is good.
    In the name of God, are you thinking of a city of Epicureans? "I do not
marry." "Nor I, for a man ought not to marry; nor ought we to beget children,
nor engage in public matters." What then will happen? whence will the citizens
come? who will bring them up? who will be governor of the youth, who preside wi
over gymnastic exercises? and in what also will the teacher instruct them? will
he teach them what the Lacedaemonians were taught, or what the Athenians were
taught? Come take a young man, bring him up according to your doctrines. The
doctrines are bad, subversive of a state, pernicious to families, and not
becoming to women. Dismiss them, man. You live in a chief city: it is your duty
to be a magistrate, to judge justly, to abstain from that which belongs to
others; no woman ought to seem beautiful to you except your own wife, and no
youth, no vessel of silver, no vessel of gold. Seek for doctrines which are
consistent with what I say, and, by making them your guide, you will with
pleasure abstain from things which have such persuasive power to lead us and
overpower us. But if to the persuasive power of these things, we also devise
such a philosophy as this which helps to push us on toward them and strengthens
us to this end, what will be the consequence? In a piece of toreutic art which
is the best part? the silver or the workmanship? The substance of the hand is
the flesh; but the work of the hand is the principal part. The duties then are
also three; those which are directed toward the existence of a thing; those
which are directed toward its existence in a particular kind; and third, the
chief or leading things themselves. So also in man we ought not to value the
material, the poor flesh, but the principal. What are these? Engaging in public
business, marrying, begetting children, venerating God, taking care of parents,
and, generally, having desires, aversions, pursuits of things and avoidances,
in the way in which we ought to do these things, and according to our nature.
And how are we constituted by nature? Free, noble, modest: for what other
animal blushes? what other is capable of receiving the appearance of shame? and
we are so constituted by nature as to subject pleasure to these things, as a
minister, a servant, in order that it may call forth our activity, in order
that it may keep us constant in acts which are conformable to nature.
    "But I am rich and I want nothing." Why, then, do you pretend to be a
philosopher? Your golden and your silver vessels are enough for you. What need
have you of principles? "But I am also a judge of the Greeks." Do you know how
to judge? Who taught you to know? "Caesar wrote to me a codicil." Let him write
and give you a commission to judge of music; and what will be the use of it to
you? Still how did you become a judge? whose hand did you kiss? the hand of
Symphorus or Numenius? Before whose bedchamber have you slept? To whom have you
sent gifts? Then do you not see that to be a judge is just of the same value as
Numenius is? "But I can throw into prison any man whom I please." So you can do
with a stone. "But I can beat with sticks whom I please." So you may an ass.
This is not a governing of men. Govern us as rational animals: show us what is
profitable to us, and we will follow it: show us what is unprofitable, and we
will turn away from it. Make us imitators of yourself, as Socrates made men
imitators of himself. For he was like a governor of men, who made them subject
to him their desires, their aversion, their movements toward an object and
their turning away from it. "Do this: do not do this: if you do not obey, I
will throw you into prison." This is not governing men like rational animals.
But I: As Zeus has ordained, so act: if you do not act so, you will feel the
penalty, you will be punished. What will be the punishment? Nothing else than
not having done your duty: you will lose the character of fidelity, modesty,
propriety. Do not look for greater penalties than these.

To a certain rhetorician who was going up to Rome on a suit

    When a certain person came to him, who was going up to Rome on account of a
suit which had regard to his rank, Epictetus inquired the reason of his going
to Rome, and the man then asked what he thought about the matter. Epictetus
replied: If you ask me what you will do in Rome, whether you will succeed or
fall, I have no rule about this. But if you ask me how you will fare, I can
tell you: if you have right opinions, you will fare well; if they are false,
you will fare ill. For to every man the cause of his acting is opinion. For
what is the reason why you desired to be elected governor of the Cnossians?
Your opinion. What is the reason that you are now going up to Rome? Your
opinion. And going in winter, and with danger and expense. "I must go." What
tells you this? Your opinion. Then if opinions are the causes of all actions,
and a man has bad opinions, such as the cause may be, such also is the effect.
Have we then all sound opinions, both you and your adversary? And how do you
differ? But have you sounder opinions than your adversary? Why? You think so.
And so does he think that his opinions are better; and so do madmen. This is a
bad criterion. But show to me that you have made some inquiry into your
opinions and have taken some pains about them. And as now you are sailing to
Rome in order to become governor of the Cnossians, and you are not content to
stay at home with the honors which you had, but you desire something greater
and more conspicuous, so when did you ever make a voyage for the purpose of
examining your own opinions, and casting them out, if you have any that are
bad? Whom have you approached for this purpose? What time have you fixed for
it? What age? Go over the times of your life by yourself, if you are ashamed of
me. When you were a boy, did you examine your own opinions? and did you not
then, as you do all things now, do as you did do? and when you were become a
youth and attended the rhetoricians, and yourself practiced rhetoric, what did
you imagine that you were deficient in? And when you were a young man and
engaged in public matters, and pleaded causes yourself, and were gaining
reputation, who then seemed your equal? And when would you have submitted to
any man examining and show that your opinions are bad? What, then, do you wish
me to say to you? "Help me in this matter." I have no theorem (rule) for this.
Nor have you, if you came to me for this purpose, come to me as a philosopher,
but as to a seller of vegetables or a shoemaker. "For what purpose then have
philosophers theorems?" For this purpose, that whatever may happen, our ruling
faculty may be and continue to be conformable to nature. Does this seem to you
a small thing? "No; but the greatest." What then? does it need only a short
time? and is it possible to seize it as you pass by? If you can, seize it.
    Then you will say, "I met with Epictetus as I should meet with a stone or a
statue": for you saw me, and nothing more. But he meets with a man as a man,
who learns his opinions, and in his turn shows his own. Learn my opinions: show
me yours; and then say that you have visited me. Let us examine one another: if
I have any bad opinion, take it away; if you have any, show it. This is the
meaning of meeting with a philosopher. "Not so, but this is only a passing
visit, and while we are hiring the vessel, we can also see Epictetus. Let us
see what he says." Then you go away and say: "Epictetus was nothing: he used
solecisms and spoke in a barbarous way." For of what else do you come as
judges? "Well, but a man may say to me, "If I attend to such matters, I shall
have no land, as you have none; I shall have no silver cups as you have none,
nor fine beasts as you have none." In answer to this it is perhaps sufficient
to say: I have no need of such things: but if you possess many things you have
need of others: whether you choose or not, you are poorer than I am. "What then
have I need of?" Of that which you have not: of firmness, of a mind which is
conformable to nature, of being free from perturbation. Whether I have a patron
or not, what is that to me? but it is something to you. I am richer than you: I
am not anxious what Caesar will think of me: for this reason, I flatter no man.
This is what I possess instead of vessels of silver and gold. You have utensils
of gold; but your discourse, your opinions, your assents, your movements, your
desires are of earthen ware. But when I have these things conformable to
nature, why should I not employ my studies also upon reason? for I have
leisure: my mind is not distracted. What shall I do, since I have no
distraction? What more suitable to a man have I than this? When you have
nothing to do, you are disturbed, you go to the theatre or you wander about
without a purpose. Why should not the philosopher labour to improve his reason?
You employ yourself about crystal vessels: I employ myself about the syllogism
named "The Living": you about myrrhine vessels; I employ myself about the
syllogism named "The Denying." To you everything appears small that you
possess: to me all that I have appears great. Your desire is insatiable: mine
is satisfied. To (children) who put their hand into a narrow necked earthen
vessel and bring out figs and nuts, this happens; if they fill the hand, they
cannot take it out, and then they cry. Drop a few of them and you will draw
things out. And do you part with your desires: do not desire many things and
you will have what you want.

In what manner we ought to bear sickness

    When the need of each opinion comes, we ought to have it in readiness: on
the occasion of breakfast, such as relate to breakfast; in the bath, those that
concern the bath; in bed, those that concern bed.
       Let sleep not come upon thy languid eyes
       Before each daily action thou hast scann'd;
       What's done amiss, what done, what left undone;
       From first to last examine all, and then
       Blame what is wrong in what is right rejoice.
    And we ought to retain these verses in such way that we may use them, not
that we may utter them aloud, as when we exclaim "Paean Apollo." Again in fever
we should have ready such opinions as concern a fever; and we ought not, as
soon as the fever begins, to lose and forget all. (A man who has a fever) may
"If I philosophize any longer, may I be hanged: wherever I go, I must take care
of the poor body, that a fever may not come." But what is philosophizing? Is it
not a preparation against events which may happen? Do you not understand that
you are saying something of this kind? "If I shall still prepare myself to bear
with patience what happens, may I be hanged." But this is just as if a man
after receiving blows should give up the Pancratium. In the Pancratium it is in
our power to desist and not to receive blows. But in the other matter, we give
up philosophy, what shall we gain I gain? What then should a man say on the
occasion of each painful thing? "It was for this that I exercised myself, for
this I disciplined myself." God says to you, "Give me a proof that you have
duly practiced athletics, that you have eaten what you ought, that you have
been exercised, that you have obeyed the aliptes." Then do you show yourself
weak when the time for action comes? Now is the time for the fever. Let it be
borne well. Now is the time for thirst, well; now is the time for hunger, bear
it well. Is it not in your power? who shall hinder you? The physician will
hinder you from drinking; but he cannot prevent you from bearing thirst well:
and he will hinder you from eating; but he cannot prevent you from bearing
hunger well.
    "But I cannot attend to my philosophical studies." And for what purpose do
you follow them? Slave, is it not that you may be happy, that you may be
constant, is it not that you may be in a state conformable to nature and live
so? What hinders you when you have a fever from having your ruling faculty
conformable to nature? Here is the proof of the thing, here is the test of the
philosopher. For this also is a part of life, like walking, like sailing, like
journeying by land, so also is fever. Do you read when you are walking? No. Nor
do you when you have a fever. if you walk about well, you have all that belongs
to a man who walks. If you bear fever well, you have all that belongs to a man
in a fever. What is it to bear a fever well? Not to blame God or man; not to be
afflicted it that which happens, to expect death well and nobly, to do what
must be done: when the physician comes in, not to be frightened at what he
says; nor if he says, "You are doing well," to be overjoyed. For what good has
he told you? and when you were in health, what good was that to you? And even
if he says, "You are in a bad way," do not despond. For what is it to be ill?
is it that you are near the severance of the soul and the body? what harm is
there in this? If you are not near now, will you not afterward be near? Is the
world going to be turned upside down when you are dead? Why then do you flatter
the physician? Why do you say, "If you please, master, I shall be well"? Why do
you give him an opportunity of raising his eyebrows? Do you not value a
physician, as you do a shoemaker when he is measuring your foot, or a carpenter
when he is building your house, and so treat the physician as to the body which
is not yours, but by nature dead? He who has a fever has an opportunity of
doing this: if he does these things, he has what belongs to him. For it is not
the business of a philosopher to look after these externals, neither his wine
nor his oil nor his poor body, but his own ruling power. But as to externals
how must he act? so far as not to be careless about them. Where then is there
reason for fear? where is there, then, still reason for anger, and of fear
about what belongs to others, about things which are of no value? For we ought
to have these two principles in readiness: that except the will nothing is good
nor bad; and that we ought not to lead events, but to follow them. "My brother
ought not to have behaved thus to me." No; but he will see to that: and,
however he may behave, I will conduct myself toward him as I ought. For this is
my own business: that belongs to another; no man can prevent this, the other
thing can be hindered.

Certain miscellaneous matters

    There are certain penalties fixed as by law for those who disobey the
divine administration. Whoever thinks any other thing to be good except those
things which depend on the will, let him envy, let him desire, let him flatter,
let him be perturbed: whoever considers anything else to be evil, let him
grieve, let him lament, let him weep, let him be unhappy. And yet, though so
severely punished, we cannot desist.
    Remember what the poet says about the stranger:
       Stranger, I must not, e'en if a worse man come.
This, then, may be applied even to a father: "I must not, even if a worse man
than you should come, treat a father unworthily-, for all are from paternal
Zeus." And of a brother, "For all are from the Zeus who presides over kindred."
And so in the other relations of life we shall find Zeus to be an inspector.

About exercise

    We ought not to make our exercises consist in means contrary to nature and
adapted to cause admiration, for, if we do so, we, who call ourselves
philosophers, shall not differ at all from jugglers. For it is difficult even
to walk on a rope; and not only difficult, but it is also dangerous. Ought we
for this reason to practice walking on a rope, or setting up a palm tree, or
embracing statues? By no means. Everything, which is difficult and dangerous is
not suitable for practice; but that is suitable which conduces to the working
out of that which is proposed to us as a thing to be worked out. To live with
desire and aversion, free from restraint. And what is this? Neither to be
disappointed in that which you desire, nor to fall into anything which you
would avoid. Toward this object, then, exercise ought to tend. For, since it is
not possible to have your desire not disappointed and your aversion free from
falling into that which you would avoid, great and constant practice you must
know that if you allow your desire and aversion to turn to things which are not
within the power of the will, you will neither have your desire capable of
attaining your object, nor your aversion free from the power of avoiding that
which you would avoid. And since strong habit leads, and we are accustomed to
employ desire and aversion only to things which are not within the power of our
will, we ought to oppose to this habit a contrary habit, and where there is
great slipperiness in the appearances, there to oppose the habit of exercise.
    I am rather inclined to pleasure: I will incline to the contrary side above
measure for the sake of exercise. I am averse to pain: I will rub and exercise
against this the appearances which are presented to me for the purpose of
withdrawing my aversion from every such thing. For who is a practitioner in
exercise? He who practices not using his desire, and applies his aversion only
to things which are within the power of his will, and practices most in the
things which are difficult to conquer. For this reason one man must practice
himself more against one thing and another against another thing. What, then,
is it to the purpose to set up a palm tree, or to carry about a tent of skins,
or a mortar and a pestle? Practice, man, if you are irritable, to endure if you
are abused, not to be vexed if you are treated with dishonour. Then you will
make so much progress that, even if a man strikes you, you will say to
yourself, "Imagine that you have embraced a statue": then also exercise
yourself to use wine properly so as not to drink much, for in this also there
are men who foolishly practice themselves; but first of all you should abstain
from it, and abstain from a young girl and dainty cakes. Then at last, if
occasion presents itself, for the purpose of trying yourself at a proper time,
you will descend into the arena to know if appearances overpower you as they
did formerly. But at first fly far from that which is stronger than yourself:
the contest is unequal between a charming young girl and a beginner in
philosophy. "The earthen pitcher," as the saying is, "and the rock do not
agree."
    After the desire and the aversion comes the second topic of the movements
toward action and the withdrawals from it; that you may be obedient to reason,
that you do nothing out of season or place, or contrary to any propriety of the
kind. The third topic concerns the assents, which is related to the things
which are persuasive and attractive. For as Socrates said, "we ought not to
live a life without examination," so we ought not to accept an appearance
without examination, but we should say, "Wait, let me see what you are and
whence you come"; like the watch at night, "Show me the pass." "Have you the
signal from nature which the appearance that may be accepted ought to have?"
And finally whatever means are applied to the body by those who exercise it, if
they tend in any way toward desire and it, aversion, they also may be fit means
of exercise; but if they are for display, they are the indications of one who
has turned himself toward something external, and who is hunting for something
else, and who looks for spectators who will say, "Oh the great man." For this
reason, Apollonius said well, "When you intend to exercise yourself for your
own advantage, and you are thirsty from heat, take in a mouthful of cold water,
and spit it out, and tell nobody."


What solitude is, and what kind of person a solitary man is

    Solitude is a certain condition of a helpless man. For because a man is
alone, he is not for that reason also solitary; just as though a man is among
numbers, he is not therefore not solitary. When then we have lost either a
brother, or a son, or a friend on whom we were accustomed to repose, we say
that we are left solitary, though we are often in Rome, though such a crowd
meet us, though so many live in the same place, and sometimes we have a great
number of slaves. For the man who is solitary, as it is conceived, is
considered to be a helpless person and exposed to those who wish to harm him.
For this reason when we travel, then especially do we say that we are lonely
when we fall among robbers, for it is not the sight of a human creature which
removes us from solitude, but the sight of one who is faithful and modest and
helpful to us. For if being alone is enough to make solitude, you may say that
even Zeus is solitary in the conflagration and bewails himself saying, "Unhappy
that I am who have neither Hera, nor Athena, nor Apollo, nor brother, nor son,
nor descendant nor kinsman." This is what some say that he does when he is
alone at the conflagration. For they do not understand how a man passes his
life when he is alone, because they set out from a certain natural principle,
from the natural desire of community and mutual love and from the pleasure of
conversation among men. But none the less a man ought to be prepared in a
manner for this also, to be able to be sufficient for himself and to be his own
companion. For as Zeus dwells with himself, and is tranquil by himself, and
thinks of his own administration and of its nature, and is employed in thoughts
suitable to himself; so ought we also to be able to talk with ourselves, not to
feel the want of others also, not to be unprovided with the means of passing
our time; to observe the divine administration and the relation of ourselves to
everything else; to consider how we formerly were affected toward things that
happen and how at present; what are still the things which give us pain; how
these also can be cured and how removed; if any things require improvement, to
improve them according to reason.
    For you see that Caesar appears to furnish us with great peace, that there
are no longer enemies nor battles nor great associations of robbers nor of
pirates, but we can travel at every hour and sail from east to west. But can
Caesar give us security from fever also, can he from shipwreck, from fire, from
earthquake or from lightning? well, I will say, can he give us security against
love? He cannot. From sorrow? He cannot. From envy? He cannot. In a word then
he cannot protect us from any of these things. But the doctrine of philosophers
promises to give us security even against these things. And what does it say?
"Men, if you will attend to me, wherever you are, whatever you are doing, you
will not feel sorrow, nor anger, nor compulsion, nor hindrance, but you will
pass your time without perturbations and free from everything." When a man has
this peace, not proclaimed by Caesar (for how should he be able to proclaim
it?), but by God through reason, is he not content when he is alone? when he
sees and reflects, "Now no evil can happen to me; for me there is no robber, no
earthquake, everything is full of peace, full of tranquillity: every way, every
city, every meeting, neighbor, companion is harmless. One person whose business
it is, supplies me with food; another with raiment; another with perceptions,
and preconceptions. And if he does not supply what is necessary, He gives the
signal for retreat, opens the door, and says to you, 'Go.' Go whither? To
nothing terrible, but to the place from which you came, to your friends and
kinsmen, to the elements: what there was in you of fire goes to fire; of earth,
to earth; of air, to air; of water to water: no Hades, nor Acheron, nor
Cocytus, nor Pyriphlegethon, but all is full of Gods and Demons." When a man
has such things to think on, and sees the sun, the moon and stars, and enjoys
earth and sea, he is not solitary nor even helpless. "Well then, if some man
should come upon me when I am alone and murder me?" Fool, not murder you, but
your poor body.
    What kind of solitude then remains? what want? why do we make ourselves
worse than children? and what do children do when they are left alone? They
take up shells and ashes, and they build something, then pull it down, and
build something else, and so they never want the means of passing the time.
Shall I, then, if you sail away, sit down and weep, because I have been left
alone and solitary? Shall I then have no shells, no ashes? But children do what
they do through want of thought, and we through knowledge are unhappy.
    Every great power is dangerous to beginners. You must then bear such things
as you are able, but conformably to nature: but not... Practice sometimes a way
of living like a man in health. Abstain from food, drink water, abstain
sometimes altogether from desire, in order that you may some time desire
consistently with reason; and if consistently with reason, when you have
anything good in you, you will desire well. "Not so; but we wish to live like
wise men immediately and to be useful to men." Useful how? what are you doing?
have you been useful to yourself? "But, I suppose, you wish to exhort them."
You exhort them! You wish to be useful to them. Show to them in your own
example what kind of men philosophy makes, and don't trifle. When you are
eating, do good to those who eat with you; when you are drinking, to those who
are drinking with you; by yielding to all, giving way, bearing with them, thus
do them good, and do not spit on them your phlegm.


Certain miscellaneous matters

    As bad tragic actors cannot sing alone, but in company with many: so some
persons cannot walk about alone. Man, if you are anything, both walk alone and
talk to yourself, and do not hide yourself in the chorus. Examine a little at
last, look around, stir yourself up, that you may know who you are.
    When a man drinks water, or does anything for the sake of practice,
whenever there is an opportunity he tells it to all: "I drink water." Is it for
this that you drink water, for the purpose of drinking water? Man, if it is
good for you to drink, drink; but if not, you are acting ridiculously. But if
it is good for you and you do drink, say nothing about it to those who are
displeased with water-drinkers. What then, do you wish to please these very
men?
    Of things that are done some are done with a final purpose, some according
to occasion, others with a certain reference to circumstances, others for the
purpose of complying with others. and some according to a fixed scheme of life.
    You must root out of men these two things, arrogance and distrust.
Arrogance, then, is the opinion that you want nothing: but distrust is the
opinion that you cannot be happy when so many circumstances surround you.
Arrogance is removed by confutation; and Socrates was the first who practiced
this. And, that the thing is not impossible, inquire and seek. This search will
do you no harm; and in a manner this is philosophizing, to seek how it is
possible to employ desire and aversion without impediment.
    "I am superior to you, for my father is a man of consular rank." Another
says, "I have been a tribune, but you have not." If we were horses, would you
say, "My father was swifter?" "I have much barley and fodder, or elegant neck
ornaments." If, then, while you were saying this, I said, "Be it so: let us run
then." Well, is there nothing in a man such as running in a horse, by which it
will he known which is superior and inferior? Is there not modesty, fidelity,
justice? Show yourself superior in these, that you may be superior as a man. If
you tell me that you can kick violently, I also will say to you that you are
proud of that which is the act of an ass.


That we ought to proceed with circumspection to everything

    In every act consider what precedes and what follows, and then proceed to
the act. If you do not consider, you will at first begin with spirit, since you
have not thought at all of the things which follow; but afterward, when some
consequences have shown themselves, you will basely desist. "I wish to conquer
at the Olympic games." "And I too, by the gods: for it is a fine thing." But
consider here what precedes and what follows; and then, if it is for your good,
undertake the thing. You must act according to rules, follow strict diet,
abstain from delicacies, exercise yourself by compulsion at fixed times, in
heat, in cold; drink no cold water, nor wine, when there is opportunity of
drinking it. In a word you must surrender yourself to the trainer as you do to
a physician. Next in the contest, you must be covered with sand, sometimes
dislocate a hand, sprain an ankle, swallow a quantity of dust, be scourged with
the whip; and after undergoing all this, you must sometimes be conquered. After
reckoning all these things, if you have still an inclination, go to the
athletic practice. If you do not reckon them, observe you behave like children
who at one time you wi play as wrestlers, then as gladiators, then blow a
trumpet, then act a tragedy, when they have seen and admired such things. So
you also do: you are at one time a wrestler, then a gladiator, then a
philosopher, then a rhetorician; but with your whole soul you are nothing: like
the ape, you imitate all that you see; and always one thing after another
pleases you, but that which becomes familiar displeases you. For you have never
undertaken anything after consideration, nor after having explored the whole
matter and put it to a strict examination; but you have undertaken it at hazard
and with a cold desire. Thus some persons having seen a philosopher and having
heard one speak like Euphrates- yet who can speak like him?- wish to be
philosophers themselves.
    Man, consider first what the matter is, then your own nature also, what it
is able to bear. If you are a wrestler, look at your shoulders, your thighs,
your loins: for different men are naturally formed for different things. Do you
think that, if you do, you can be a philosopher? Do you think that you can eat
as you do now, drink as you do now, and in the same way be angry and out of
humour? You must watch, labour, conquer certain desires, you must depart from
your kinsmen, be despised by your slave, laughed at by those who meet you, in
everything you must be in an inferior condition, as to magisterial office, in
honours, in courts of justice. When you have considered all these things
completely, then, if you think proper, approach to philosophy, if you would
gain in exchange for these things freedom from perturbations, liberty,
tranquillity. If you have not considered these things, do not approach
philosophy: do not act like children, at one time a philosopher, then a tax
collector, then a rhetorician, then a procurator of Caesar These things are not
consistent. You must be one man either good or bad: you must either labour at
your own ruling faculty or at external things: you must either labour at things
within or at external things: that is, you must either occupy the place of a
philosopher or that of one of the vulgar.
    A person said to Rufus when Galba was murdered, "Is the world now governed
by Providence?" But Rufus replied, "Did I ever incidentally form an argument
from Galba that the world is governed by Providence?"



That we ought with caution to enter, into familiar intercourse with men

    If a man has frequent intercourse with others, either for talk, or drinking
together, or generally for social purposes, he must either become like them, or
change them to his own fashion. For if a man places a piece of quenched
charcoal close to a piece that is burning, either the quenched charcoal will
quench the other, or the burning charcoal will light that which is quenched.
Since, then, the danger is so great, we must cautiously enter into such
intimacies with those of the common sort, and remember that it is impossible
that a man can keep company with one who is covered with soot without being
partaker of the soot himself. For what will you do if a man speaks about
gladiators, about horses, about athletes, or, what is worse, about men? "Such a
person is bad," "Such a person is good": "This was well done," "This was done
badly." Further, if he scoff, or ridicule, or show an ill-natured disposition?
Is any man among us prepared like a lute-player when he takes a lute, so that
as soon as he has touched the strings, he discovers which are discordant, and
tunes the instrument? such a power as Socrates had who in all his social
intercourse could lead his companions to his own purpose? How should you have
this power? It is therefore a necessary consequence that you are carried about
by the common kind of people.
    Why, then, are they more powerful than you? Because they utter these
useless words from their real opinions: but you utter your elegant words only
from your lips; for this reason they are without strength and dead, and it is
nauseous to listen to your exhortations and your miserable virtue, which is
talked of everywhere. In this way the vulgar have the advantage over you: for
every opinion is strong and invincible. Until, then, the good sentiments are
fixed in you, and you shall have acquired a certain power for your security, I
advise you to be careful in your association with like wax in the sun there
will be melted away whatever you inscribe on your minds in the school.
Withdraw, then, yourselves far from the sun so long as you have these waxen
sentiments. For this reason also philosophers advise men to leave their native
country, because ancient habits distract them and do not allow a beginning to
be made of a different habit; nor can we tolerate those who meet us and say:
"See such a one is now a philosopher, who was once so-and-so." Thus also
physicians send those who have lingering diseases to a different country and a
different air; and they do right, Do you also introduce other habits than those
which you have: fix your opinions and exercise yourselves in them. But you do
not so: you go hence to a spectacle, to a show of gladiators, to a place of
exercise, to a circus; then you come back hither, and again from this place you
go to those places, and still the same persons. And there is no pleasing habit,
nor attention, nor care about self and observation of this kind, "How shall I
use the appearances presented to me? according to nature, or contrary to
nature? how do I answer to them? as I ought, or as I ought not? Do I say to
those things which are independent of the will, that they do not concern me?"
For if you are not yet in this state, fly from your former habits, fly from the
common sort, if you intend ever to begin to be something.



On providence

    When you make any charge against Providence, consider, and you will learn
that the thing has happened according to reason. "Yes, but the unjust man has
the advantage." In what? "In money." Yes, for he is superior to you in this,
that he flatters, is free from shame, and is watchful. What is the wonder? But
see if he has the advantage over you in being faithful, in being modest: for
you will not find it to be so; but wherein you are superior, there you will
find that you have the advantage. And I once said to a man who was vexed
because Philostorgus was fortunate: "Would you choose to lie with Sura?" "May
it never happen," he replied, "that this day should come?" "Why then are you
vexed, if he receives something in return for that which he sells; or how can
you consider him happy who acquires those things by such means as you
abominate; or what wrong does Providence, if he gives the better things to the
better men? Is it not better to be modest than to be rich?" He admitted this.
Why are you vexed then, man, when you possess the better thing? Remember, then,
always, and have in readiness, the truth that this is a law of nature, that the
superior has an advantage over the inferior in that in which he is superior;
and you will never be vexed.
    "But my wife treats me badly." Well, if any man asks you what this is, say,
"My wife treats me badly." "Is there, then, nothing more?" Nothing. "My father
gives me nothing." But to say that this is an evil is something which must be
added to it externally, and falsely added. For this reason we must not get rid
of poverty, but of the opinion about poverty, and then we shall be happy.



That we ought not to be disturbed by any news

    When anything shall be reported to you which is of a nature to disturb,
have this principle in readiness, that the news is about nothing which is
within the power of your will. Can any man report to you that you have formed a
bad opinion, or had a bad desire? By no means. But perhaps he will report that
some person is dead. What then is that to you? He may report that some person
speaks ill of you. What then is that to you? Or that your father is planning
something or other. Against whom? Against your will? How can he? But is it
against your poor body, against your little property? You are quite safe: it is
not against you. But the judge declares that you have committed an act of
impiety. And did not the judges make the same declaration against Socrates ?
Does it concern you that the judge has made this declaration? No. Why then do
you trouble yourself any longer about it? Your father has a certain duty, and
if he shall not fulfill it, he loses the character of a father, of a man of
natural affection, of gentleness. Do not wish him to lose anything else on this
account. For never does a man do wrong, in one thing, and suffer in another. On
the other side it is your duty to make your defense firmly, modestly, without
anger: but if you do not, you also lose the character of a son, of a man of
modest behavior, of generous character. Well then, is the judge free from
danger? No; but he also is in equal danger. Why then are you still afraid of
his decision? What have you to do with that which is another man's evil? It is
your own evil to make a bad defense: be on your guard against this only. But to
be condemned or not to be condemned, as that is the act of another person, so
it is the evil of another person. "A certain person threatens you." Me? No. "He
blames you." Let him see how he manages his own affairs. "He is going to
condemn you unjustly." He is a wretched man.


What is the condition of a common kind of man and of a philosopher

    The first difference between a common person and a philosopher is this: the
common person says, "Woe to me for my little child, for my brother, for my
father." The philosopher, if he shall ever be compelled to say, "Woe to me,"
stops and says, "but for myself." For nothing which is independent of the will
can hinder or damage the will, and the will can only hinder or damage itself.
If, then, we ourselves incline in this direction, so as, when we are unlucky,
to blame ourselves and to remember that nothing else is the cause of
perturbation or loss of tranquillity except our own opinion, I swear to you by
all the gods that we have made progress. But in the present state of affairs we
have gone another way from the beginning. For example, while we were still
children, the nurse, if we ever stumbled through want of care, did not chide
us, but would beat the stone. But what did the stone do? Ought the stone to
have moved on account of your child's folly? Again, if we find nothing to eat
on coming out of the bath, the pedagogue never checks our appetite, but he
flogs the cook. Man, did we make you the pedagogue of the cook and not of the
child? Correct the child, improve him. In this way even when we are grown up we
are like children. For he who is unmusical is a child in music; he who is
without letters is a child in learning: he who is untaught, is a child in life.



That we can derive advantage from all external things

    In the case of appearances, which are objects of the vision, nearly all
have allowed the good and the evil to be in ourselves, and not in externals. No
one gives the name of good to the fact that it is day, nor bad to the fact that
it is night, nor the name of the greatest evil to the opinion that three are
four. But what do men say? They say that knowledge is good, and that error is
bad; so that even in respect to falsehood itself there is a good result, the
knowledge that it is falsehood. So it ought to be in life also. "Is health a
good thing, and is sickness a bad thing" No, man. "But what is it?" To be
healthy, and healthy in a right way, is good: to be healthy in a bad way is
bad; so that it is possible to gain advantage even from sickness, I declare.
For is it not possible to gain advantage even from death, and is it not
possible to gain advantage from mutilation? Do you think that Menoeceus gained
little by death? "Could a man who says so, gain so much as Menoeceus gained?"
Come, man, did he not maintain the character of being a lover of his country, a
man of great mind, faithful, generous? And if he had continued to live, would
he not have lost all these things? would he not have gained the opposite? would
he not have gained the name of coward, ignoble, a hater of his country, a man
who feared death? Well, do you think that he gained little by dying? "I suppose
not." But did the father of Admetus gain much by prolonging his life so ignobly
and miserably? Did he not die afterward? Cease, I adjure you by the gods, to
admire things. Cease to make yourselves slaves, first of things, then on
account of things slaves of those who are able to give them or take them away.
    "Can advantage then be derived from these things." From all; and from him
who abuses you. Wherein does the man who exercises before the combat profit the
athlete? Very greatly. This man becomes my exerciser before the combat: he
exercises me in endurance, in keeping my temper, in mildness. You say no: but
he, who lays hold of my neck and disciplines my loins and shoulders, does me
good; and the exercise master does right when he says: "Raise him up with both
hands, and the heavier he is, so much the more is my advantage." But if a man
exercises me in keeping my, temper, does he not do good? This is not knowing
how to gain an advantage from men. "Is my neighbour bad?" Bad to himself, but
good to me: he exercises my good disposition, my moderation. "Is my father bad?
" Bad to himself, but to me good. This is the rod of Hermes: "Touch with it
what you please," as the saying is. "and it will be of gold." I say not so: but
bring what you please, and I will make it good. Bring disease, bring death,
bring poverty, bring abuse, bring trial on capital charges: all these things
through the rod of Hermes shall be made profitable. "What will you do with
death?" Why, what else than that it shall do you honour, or that it shall show
you by act through it, what a man is who follows the will of nature? "What will
you do with disease?" I will show its nature, I will be conspicuous in, it, I
will be firm, I will be happy, I will not flatter the physician, I will not
wish to die. What else do you seek? Whatever you shall give me, I will make it
happy, fortunate, honoured, a thing which a man shall seek.
    You say No: but take care that you do not fall sick: it is a bad thing."
This is the same as if you should say, "Take care that you never receive the
impression that three are four: that is bad." Man, how is it bad? If I think
about it as I ought, how shall it, then, do me any damage? and shall it not
even do me good? If, then, I think about poverty as I ought to do, about
disease, about not having office, is not that enough for me? will it not be an
advantage? How, then, ought I any longer to look to seek evil and good in
externals? What happens these doctrines are maintained here, but no man carries
them away home; but immediately every one is at war with his slave, with his
neighbours, with those who have sneered at him, with those who have ridiculed
him. Good luck to Lesbius, who daily proves that I know nothing.


Against those who readily come to the profession of sophists

    They who have taken up bare theorems immediately wish to vomit them forth,
as persons whose stomach is diseased do with food. First digest the thing, then
do not vomit it up thus: f you do not digest it, the thing become truly an
emetic, a crude food and unfit to eat. But after digestion show us some chance
in your ruling faculty, as athletes show in their shoulders by what they have
been exercised and what they have eaten; as those who have taken up certain
arts show by what they have learned. The carpenter does not come and say, "Hear
me talk about the carpenter's art"; but having undertaken to build a house, he
makes it, and proves that he knows the art. You also ought to do something of
the kind; eat like a man, drink like a man, dress, marry, beget children, do
the office of a citizen, endure abuse, bear unreasonable brother, bear with
your father, bear with your son, neighbour, compassion. Show us these things
that we may see that you have in truth learned something from the philosophers.
You say, "No, but come and hear me read commentaries." Go away, and seek
somebody to vomit them on. "And indeed I will expound to you the writings of
Chrysippus as no other man can: I will explain his text most clearly: I will
add also, if I can, the vehemence of Antipater and Archedemus."
    Is it, then, for this that young men shall leave their country and their
parents, that they may come to this place, and hear you explain words? Ought
they not to return with a capacity to endure, to be active in association with
others, free from passions, free from perturbation, with such a provision for
the journey of life with which they shall be able to bear well the things that
happen and derive honour from them? And how can you give them any of these
things which you do not possess? Have you done from the beginning anything else
than employ yourself about the resolution of Syllogisms, of sophistical
arguments, and in those which work by questions? "But such a man has a school;
why should not I also have a school?" These things are not done, man, in a
careless way, nor just as it may happen; but there must be a (fit) age and life
and God as a guide. You say, "No." But no man sails from a port without having
sacrificed to the Gods and invoked their help; nor do men sow without having
called on Demeter; and shall a man who has undertaken so great a work undertake
it safely without the Gods? and shall they who undertake this work come to it
with success? What else are you doing, man, than divulging the mysteries? You
say, "There is a temple at Eleusis, and one here also. There is an Hierophant
at Eleusis, and I also will make an Hierophant: there is a herald, and I will
establish a herald; there is a torch-bearer at Eleusis, and I also will
establish a torch-bearer; there are torches at Eleusis, and I will have torches
here. The words are the same: how do the things done here differ from those
done there?" Most impious man, is there no difference? these things are done
both in due place and in due time; and when accompanied with sacrifice and
prayers, when a man is first purified, and when he is disposed in his mind to
the thought that he is going to approach sacred rites and ancient rites. In
this way the mysteries are useful, in this way we come to the notion that all
these things were established by the ancients for the instruction and
correction of life. But you publish and divulge them out of time, out of place,
without sacrifices, without purity; you have not the garments which the
hierophant ought to have, nor the hair, nor the head-dress, nor the voice, nor
the age; nor have you purified yourself as he has: but you have committed to
memory the words only, and you say: "Sacred are the words by themselves."
    You ought to approach these matters in another way; the thing is great, it
is mystical, not a common thing, nor is it given to every man. But not even
wisdom perhaps is enough to enable a man to take care of youths: a man must
have also a certain readiness and fitness for this purpose, and a certain
quality of body, and above all things he must have God to advise him to occupy
this office, as God advised Socrates to occupy the place of one who confutes
error, Diogenes the office of royalty and reproof, and the office of teaching
precepts. But you open a doctor's shop, though you have nothing except physic:
but where and how they should be applied, you know not nor have you taken any
trouble about it. "See," that man says, "I too have salves for the eyes." Have
you also the power of using them? Do you know both when and how they will do
good, and to whom they will do good? Why then do you act at hazard in things of
the greatest importance? why are you careless? why do you undertake a thing
that is in no way fit for you? Leave it to those who are able to do it, and to
do it well. Do not yourself bring disgrace on philosophy through your own acts,
and be not one of those who load it with a bad reputation. But if theorems
please you, sit still and turn them over by yourself; but never say that you
are a philosopher, nor allow another to say it; but say: "He is mistaken, for
neither are my desires different from what they were before, nor is my activity
directed to other objects, nor do I assent to other things, nor in the use of
appearances have I altered at all from my former condition." This you must
think and say about yourself, if you would think as you ought: if not, act at
hazard, and do what you are doing; for it becomes you.


About cynicism

    When one of his pupils inquired of Epictetus, and he was a person who
appeared to be inclined to Cynism, what kind of person a Cynic ought to be and
what was the notion of the thing, We will inquire, said Epictetus, at leisure:
but I have so much to say to you that he who without God attempts so great a
matter, is hateful to God, and has no other purpose than to act indecently in
public. For in any well-managed house no man comes forward, and says to
himself, "I ought to be manager of the house." If he does so, the master turns
round and, seeing him insolently giving orders, drags him forth and flogs him.
So it is also in this great city; for here also there is a master of the house
who orders everything. "You are the sun; you can by going round make the year
and seasons, and make the fruits grow and nourish them, and stir the winds and
make them remit, and warm the bodies of men properly: go, travel round, and so
administer things from the greatest to the least." "You are a calf; when a lion
shall appear, do your proper business: if you do not, you will suffer." "You
are a bull: advance and fight, for this is your business, and becomes you, and
you can do it." "You can lead the army against Illium; be Agamemnon." "You can
fight in single combat against Hector: be Achilles." But if Thersites came
forward and claimed the command, he would either not have obtained it; or, if
he did obtain it, he would have disgraced himself before many witnesses.
    Do you also think about the matter carefully: it is not what it seems to
you. "I wear a cloak now and I shall wear it then: I sleep hard now, and I
shall sleep hard then: I will take in addition a little bag now and a staff,
and I will go about and begin to beg and to abuse those whom I meet; and if I
see any man plucking the hair out of his body, I will rebuke him, or if he has
dressed his hair, or if he walks about in purple." If you imagine the thing to
be such as this, keep far away from it: do not approach it: it is not at all
for you. But if you imagine it to be what it is, and do not think yourself to
be unfit for it, consider what a great thing you undertake.
    In the first place in the things which relate to yourself, you must not be
in any respect like what you do now: you must not blame God or man: you must
take away desire altogether, you must transfer avoidance only to the things
which are within the power of the will: you must not feel anger nor resentment
nor envy nor pity; a girl must not appear handsome to you, nor must you love a
little reputation, nor be pleased with a boy or a cake. For you ought to know
that the rest of men throw walls around them and houses and darkness when they
do any such things, and they have many means of concealment. A man shuts the
door, he sets somebody before the chamber: if a person comes, say that he is
out, he is not at leisure. But the Cynic instead of all these things must use
modesty as his protection: if he does not, he will he indecent in his nakedness
and under the open sky. This is his house, his door: this is the slave before
his bedchamber: this is his darkness. For he ought not to wish to hide anything
that he does: and if he does, he is gone, he has lost the character of a Cynic,
of a man who lives under the open sky, of a free man: he has begun to fear some
external thing, he has begun to have need of concealment, nor can he get
concealment when he chooses. For where shall he hide himself and how? And if by
chance this public instructor shall be detected, this pedagogue, what kind of
things will he be compelled to suffer? when then a man fears these things, is
it possible for him to be bold with his whole soul to superintend men? It
cannot be: it is impossible.
    In the first place, then, you must make your ruling faculty pure, and this
mode of life also. "Now, to me the matter to work on is my understanding, as
wood is to the carpenter, as hides to the shoemaker; and my business is the
right use of appearances. But the body is nothing to me: the parts of it are
nothing to me. Death? Let it come when it chooses, either death of the whole or
of a part. Fly, you say. And whither; can any man eject me out of the world? He
cannot. But wherever I ever I go, there is the sun, there is the moon, there
are the stars, dreams, omens, and the conversation with Gods."
    Then, if he is thus prepared, the true Cynic cannot be satisfied with this;
but he must know that he is sent a messenger from Zeus to men about good and
bad things, to show them that they have wandered and are seeking the substance
of good and evil where it is not, but where it is, they never think; and that
he is a spy, as Diogenes was carried off to Philip after the battle of
Chaeroneia as a spy. For, in fact, a Cynic is a spy of the things which are
good for men and which are evil, and it is his duty to examine carefully and to
come and report truly, and not to be struck with terror so as to point out as
enemies those who are not enemies, nor in any other way to be perturbed by
appearances nor confounded.
    It is his duty, then, to he able with a loud voice, if the occasion should
arise, and appearing on the tragic stage to say like Socrates: "Men, whither
are you hurrying, what are you doing, wretches? like blind people you are
wandering up and down: you are going by another road, and have left the true
road: you seek for prosperity and happiness where they are not, and if another
shows you where they are, you do not believe him." Why do you seek it without?
In the body? It is not there. If you doubt, look at Myro, look at Ophellius. In
possessions? It is not there. But if you do not believe me, look at Croesus:
look at those who are now rich, with what lamentations their life is filled. In
power? It is not there. If it is, those must be happy who have been twice and
thrice consuls; but they are not. Whom shall we believe in these matters? you
who from without see their affairs and are dazzled by an appearance, or the men
themselves? What do they say? Hear them when they groan, when they grieve, when
on account of these very consulships and glory and splendour they think that
they are more wretched and in greater danger. Is it in royal power? It is not:
if it were, Nero would have been happy, and Sardanapalus. But neither was
Agamemnon happy, though he was a better man than Sardanapalus and Nero; but
while others are snoring what is he doing?
       "Much from his head he tore his rooted hair."
And what does he say himself?
       "I am perplexed," he says, "and
       Disturb'd I am," and "my heart out of my bosom
       Is leaping."
    Wretch, which of your affairs goes badly? Your possessions? No. Your body?
No. But you are rich in gold and copper. What then is the matter with you? That
part of you, whatever it is, has been neglected by you and is corrupted, the
part with which we desire, with which we avoid, with which we move toward and
move from things. How neglected? He knows not the nature of good for which he
is made by nature and the nature of evil; and what is his own, and what belongs
to another; and when anything that belongs to others goes badly, he says, "Woe
to me, for the Hellenes are in dancer." Wretched is his ruling faculty, and
alone neglected and uncared for. "The Hellenes are going to die destroyed by
the Trojans." And if the Trojans do not kill them, will they not die? "Yes; but
not all at once." What difference, then, does it make? For if death is an evil,
whether men die altogether, or if they die singly, it is equally an evil. Is
anything else then going to happen than the separation of the soul and the
body? Nothing. And if the Hellenes perish, is the door closed, and is it not in
your power to die? "It is." Why then do you lament "Oh, you who are a king and
have the sceptre of Zeus?" An unhappy king does not exist more than an unhappy
god. What then art thou? In truth a shepherd: for you weep as shepherds do,
when a wolf has carried off one of their sheep: and these who are governed by
you are sheep. And why did you come hither? Was your desire in any danger? was
your aversion? was your movement? was your avoidance of things? He replies,
"No; but the wife of my brother was carried off." Was it not then a great gain
to be deprived of an adulterous wife? "Shall we be despised, then, by the
Trojans?" What kind of people are the Trojans, wise or foolish? If they are
wise, why do you fight with them? If they are fools, why do you care about
them.
    In what, then, is the good, since it is not in these things? Tell us, you
who are lord, messenger and spy. Where you do not think that it is, nor choose
to seek it: for if you chose to seek it, you would have found it to he in
yourselves; nor would you be wandering out of the way, nor seeking what belongs
to others as if it were your own. Turn your thoughts into yourselves: observe
the preconceptions which you have. What kind of a thing do you imagine the good
to be? "That which flows easily, that which is happy, that which is not
impeded." Come, and do you not naturally imagine it to be great, do you not
imagine it to be valuable? do you not imagine it to be free from harm? In what
material then ought you to seek for that which flows easily, for that which is
not impeded? in that which serves or in that which is free? "In that which is
free." Do you possess the body, then, free or is it in servile condition? "We
do not know." Do you not know that it is the slave of fever, of gout,
ophthalmia, dysentery, of a tyrant, of fire, of iron, of everything which is
stronger? Yes, it is a slave." How, then, is it possible that anything which
belongs to the body can be free from hindrance? and how is a thing great or
valuable which is naturally dead, or earth, or mud? Well then, do you possess
nothing which is free? "Perhaps nothing." And who is able to compel you to
assent to that which appears false? "No man." And who can compel you not to
assent to that which appears true? "No man." By this, then, you see that there
is something in you naturally free. But to desire or to be averse from, or to
move toward an object or to move from it, or to prepare yourself, or to propose
to do anything, which of you can do this, unless he has received an impression
of the appearance of that which is profitable or a duty? "No man." You have,
then, in these thongs also something which is not hindered and is free.
Wretched men, work out this, take care of this, seek for good here.
    "And how is it possible that a man who has nothing, who is naked,
houseless, without a hearth, squalid, without a slave, without a city, can pass
a life that flows easily?" See, God has sent you a man to show you that it is
possible. "Look at me, who am without a city, without a house, without
possessions, without a slave; I sleep on the ground; I have no wife, no
children; no praetorium, but only the earth and heavens, and one poor cloak.
And what do I want? Am I not without sorrow? am I not without fear? Am I not
free? When did any of you see me failing in the object of my desire? or ever
falling into that which I would avoid? did I ever blame God or man? did I ever
accuse any man? did any of you ever see me with sorrowful countenance? And how
do I meet with those whom you are afraid of and admire? Do not I treat them
like slaves? Who, when he sees me, does not think that he sees his king and
master?"
    This is the language of the Cynics, this their character, this is their
purpose. You say "No": but their characteristic is the little wallet, and
staff, and great jaws: the devouring of all that you give them, or storing it
up, or the abusing unseasonably all whom they meet, or displaying their
shoulder as a fine thing. Do you see how you are going, to undertake so great a
business? First take a mirror: look at your shoulders; observe your loins, your
thighs. You are going, my man, to be enrolled as a combatant in the Olympic
games, no frigid and miserable contest. In the Olympic games a man is not
permitted to be conquered only and to take his departure; but first he must be
disgraced in the sight of all the world, not in the sight of Athenians only, or
of Lacedaemonians or of Nicopolitans; next he must be whipped also if he has
entered into the contests rashly: and before being whipped, he must suffer
thirst and heat, and swallow much dust.
    Reflect more carefully, know thyself, consult the divinity, without God
attempt nothing; for if he shall advise you, be assured that he intends you to
become great or to receive many blows. For this very amusing quality is
conjoined to a Cynic: he must be flogged like an ass, and when he is flogged,
he must love those who flog him, as if he were the father of all, and the
brother of all. You say "No"; but if a man flogs you, stand in the public place
and call out, "Caesar, what do I suffer in this state of peace under thy
protection? Let us bring the offender before the proconsul." But what is Caesar
to a Cynic, or what is a proconsul, or what is any other except him who sent
the Cynic down hither, and whom he serves, namely Zeus? Does he call upon any
other than Zeus? Is he not convinced that, whatever he suffers, it is Zeus who
is exercising him? Hercules when he was exercised by Eurystheus did not think
that he was wretched, but without hesitation he attempted to execute all that
he had in hand. And is he who is trained to the contest and exercised by Zeus
going to call out and to be vexed, he who is worthy to bear the sceptre of
Diogenes? Hear what Diogenes says to the passers-by when he is in a fever,
"Miserable wretches, will you not stay? but are you going so long a journey to
Olympia to see the destruction or the fight of athletes; and will you not
choose to see the combat between a fever and a man?" Would such a man accuse
God who sent him down as if God were treating him unworthily, a man who gloried
in his circumstances, and claimed to be an example to those who were passing
by? For what shall he accuse him of? because he maintains a decency of
behavior, because he displays his virtue more conspicuously? Well, and what
does he say of poverty, about death, about pain? How did he compare his own
happiness with that of the Great King? or rather he thought that there was no
comparison between them. For where there are perturbations, and griefs, and
fears, and desires not satisfied, and aversions of things which you cannot
avoid, and envies and jealousies, how is there a road to happiness there? But
where there are corrupt principles, there these things must of necessity be.
    When the young man asked, if when a Cynic is sick, and a friend asks him to
come to his house and be taken care of in his sickness, shall the Cynic accept
the invitation, he replied: And where shall you find, I ask, a Cynic's friend?
For the man who invites ought to be such another as the that he may be worthy
of being reckoned the Cynic's friend. He ought to be a partner in the Cynic's
sceptre and his royalty, and a worthy minister, if he intends to be considered
worthy of a Cynic's friendship, as Diogenes was a friend of Antisthenes, as
Crates was a friend of Diogenes. Do you think that, if a man comes to a Cynic
and salutes him, he is the Cynic's friend, and that the Cynic will think him
worthy of receiving a Cynic into his house? So that, if you please, reflect on
this also: rather look round for some convenient dunghill on which you shall
bear your fever and which will shelter you from the north wind that you may not
be chilled. But you seem to me to wish to go into some man's house and to be
well fed there for a time. Why then do you think of attempting so great a
thing?
    "But," said the young man, "shall marriage and the procreation of children
as a chief duty be undertaken by the Cynic?" If you grant me a community of
wise men, Epictetus replies, perhaps no man will readily apply himself to the
Cynic practice. For on whose account should he undertake this manner of life?
However if we suppose that he does, nothing will prevent him from marrying and
begetting children; for his wife will be another like himself, and his
father-in-law another like himself, and his children will be brought up like
himself. But in the present state of things which is like that of an army
placed in battle order, is it not fit that the Cynic should without any
distraction be employed only on the administration of God, able to go about
among men, not tied down to the common duties of mankind, nor entangled in the
ordinary relations of life, which if he neglects, he will not maintain the
character of an honourable and good man? and if he observes them he will lose
the character of the messenger, and spy and herald of God. For consider that it
is his duty to do something toward his father-in-law, something to the other
kinsfolk of his wife, something to his wife also. He is also excluded by being
a Cynic from looking after the sickness of his own family, and from providing
for their support. And, to say nothing of the rest, he must have a vessel for
heating water for the child that he may wash it in the bath; wool for his wife
when she is delivered of a child, oil, a bed, a cup: so the furniture of the
house is increased. I say nothing of his other occupations and of his
distraction. Where, then, now is that king, he who devotes himself to the
public interests,
       The people's guardian and so full of cares.
whose duty it is to look after others, the married and those who have children;
to see who uses his wife well, who uses her badly; who quarrels; what family is
well administered, what is not; going about as a physician does and feels
pulses? He says to one, "You have a fever," to another, "You have a headache,
or the gout": he says to one, "Abstain from food"; to another he says, "Eat";
or "Do not use the bath"; to another, "You require the knife, or the cautery."
How can he have time for this who is tied to the duties of common life? is it
not his duty to supply clothing to his children, and to send them to the
schoolmaster with writing tablets, and styles. Besides, must he not supply them
with beds? for they cannot be genuine Cynics as soon as they are born. If he
does not do this, it would be better to expose the children as soon as they are
born than to kill them in this way. Consider what we are bringing the Cynic
down to, how we are taking his royalty from him. "Yes, but Crates took a wife."
You are speaking of a circumstance which arose from love and of a woman who was
another Crates. But we are inquiring about ordinary marriages and those which
are free from distractions, and making this inquiry we do not find the affair
of marriage in this state of the world a thing which is especially suited to
the Cynic.
    "How, then, shall a man maintain the existence of society?" In the name of
God, are those men greater benefactors to society who introduce into the world
to occupy their own places two or three grunting children, or those who
superintend as far as they can all mankind, and see what they do, how they
live, what they attend to, what they neglect contrary to their duty? Did they
who left little children to the Thebans do them more good than Epaminondas who
died childless? And did Priamus, who begat fifty worthless sons, or Danaus or
AEolus contribute more to the community than Homer? then shall the duty of a
general or the business of a writer exclude a man from marriage or the
begetting of children, and such a man shall not be judged to have accepted the
condition of childlessness for nothing; and shall not the royalty of a Cynic be
considered an equivalent for the want of children? Do we not perceive his
grandeur and do we not justly contemplate the character of Diogenes; and do we,
instead of this, turn our eyes to the present Cynics, who are dogs that wait at
tables and in no respect imitate the Cynics of old except perchance in breaking
wind, but in nothing else? For such matters would not have moved us at all nor
should we have wondered if a Cynic should not marry or beget children. Man, the
Cynic is the father of all men; the men are his sons, the women are his
daughters: he so carefully visits all, so well does he care for all. Do you
think that it is from idle impertinence that he rebukes those whom he meets? He
does it as a father, as a brother, and as the minister of the father of all,
the minister of Zeus.
    If you please, ask me also if a Cynic shall engage in the administration of
the state. Fool, do you seek a greater form of administration than that in
which he is engaged? Do you ask if he shall appear among the Athenians and say
something about the revenues and the supplies, he who must talk with all men,
alike with Athenians, alike with Corinthians, alike with Romans, not about
supplies, nor yet about revenues, nor about peace or war, but about happiness
and unhappiness, about good fortune and bad fortune, about slavery and freedom?
When a man has undertaken the administration of such a state, do you ask me if
he shall engage in the administration of a state? ask me also if he shall
govern: again I will say to you: Fool, what greater government shall he
exercise than that which he exercises now?
    It is necessary also for such a man to have a certain habit of body: for if
he appears to be consumptive, thin and pale, his testimony has not then the
same weight. For he must not only by showing the qualities of the soul prove to
the vulgar that it is in his power independent of the things which they admire
to be a good man, but he must also show by his body that his simple and frugal
way of living in the open air does not injure even the body. "See," he says, "I
am a proof of this, and my own body also is." So Diogenes used to do, for he
used to go about fresh-looking, and he attracted the notice of the many by his
personal appearance. But if a Cynic is an object of compassion, he seems to a
beggar: all persons turn away from him, all are offended with him; for neither
ought he to appear dirty so that he shall not also in this respect drive away
men; but his very roughness ought to be clean and attractive.
    There ought also to belong to the Cynic much natural grace and sharpness;
and if this is not so, he is a stupid fellow, and nothing else; and he must
have these qualities that he may be able readily and fitly to be a match for
all circumstances that may happen. So Diogenes replied to one who said, "Are
you the Diogenes who does not believe that there are gods?" "And, how," replied
Diogenes, "can this be when I think that you are odious to the gods?" On
another occasion in reply to Alexander, who stood by him when he was sleeping,
and quoted Homer's line,
       A man a councilor should not sleep all night,
he answered, when he was half-asleep,
       The people's guardian and so full of cares.
    But before all the Cynic's ruling faculty must be purer than the sun; and,
if it is not, he must be a cunning knave and a fellow of no principle, since
while he himself is entangled in some vice he will reprove others. For see how
the matter stands: to these kings and tyrants their guards and arms give the
power of reproving some persons, and of being able even to punish those who do
wrong though they are themselves bad; but to a Cynic instead of arms and guards
it is conscience which gives this power. When he knows that be has watched and
labored for mankind, and has slept pure, and sleep has left him still purer,
and that he thought whatever he has thought as a friend of the gods, as a
minister, as a participator of the power of Zeus, and that on all occasions he
is ready to say
       Lead me, O Zeus, and thou O Destiny;
and also, "If so it pleases the gods, so let it be"; why should he not have
confidence to speak freely to his own brothers, to his children, in a word to
his kinsmen? For this reason he is neither overcurious nor a busybody when he
is in this state of mind: for he is not a meddler with the affairs of others
when he is superintending human affairs, but he is looking after his own
affairs. If that is not so, you may also say that the general is a busybody,
when he inspects his soldiers, and examines them, and watches them, and
punishes the disorderly. But if, while you have a cake under your arm, you
rebuke others, I will say to you: "Will you not rather go away into a corner
and eat that which you have stolen"; what have you to do with the affairs of
others? For who are you? are you the bull of the herd, or the queen of the
bees? Show me the tokens of your supremacy, such as they have from nature. But
if you are a drone claiming the sovereignty over the bees, do you not suppose
that your fellow citizens will put you down as the bees do the drones?
    The Cynic also ought to have such power of endurance as to seem insensible
to the common sort and a stone: no man reviles him, no man strikes him, no man
insults him, but he gives his body that any man who chooses may do with it what
he likes. For he bears in mind that the inferior must be overpowered by the
superior in that in which it is inferior; and the body is inferior to the many,
the weaker to the stronger. He never then descends into such a contest in which
he can be overpowered; but he immediately withdraws from things which belong to
others, he claims not the things which are servile. where there is will and the
use of appearances, there you will see how many eyes he has so that you may
say, "Argus was blind compared with him." Is his assent ever hasty, his
movement rash, does his desire ever fall in its object, does that which he
would avoid befall him, is his purpose unaccomplished, does he ever find fault,
is he ever humiliated, is he ever envious? To these he directs all his
attention and energy; but as to everything else he snores supine. All is peace;
there is no robber who takes away his will, no tyrant. But what say you as to
his body? I say there is. And as to magistracies and honours? What does he care
for them? When then any person would frighten him through them, he says to him,
"Begone, look for children: masks are formidable to them; but I know that they
are made of shell, and they have nothing inside."
    About such a matter as this you are deliberating. Therefore, if you please,
I urge you in God's name, defer the matter, and first consider your preparation
for it. For see what Hector says to Andromache, "Retire rather," he says, "into
the house and weave:
       War is the work of men
       Of all indeed, but specially 'tis mine.
So he was conscious of his own qualification, and knew her weakness.


To those who read and discuss for the sake of ostentation

    First say to yourself, who you wish to be: then do accordingly what you are
doing; for in nearly all other things we see this to be so. Those who follow
athletic exercises first determine what they wish to be, then do accordingly
what follows. If a man is a runner in the long course, there is a certain kind
of diet, of walking, rubbing and exercise: if a man is a runner in the stadium,
all these things are different; if he is a Pentathlete, they are still more
different. So you will find it also in the arts. If you are a carpenter, you
will have such and such things: if a worker in metal, such things. For
everything that we do, if we refer it to no end, we shall do it to no purpose;
and if we refer it to the wrong end, we shall miss the mark. Further, there is
a general end or purpose, and a particular purpose. First of all, we must act
as a man. What is comprehended in this? We must not be like a sheep, though
gentle, nor mischievous, like a wild beast. But the particular cud has
reference to each person's mode of life and his will. The lute-player acts as a
lute-player, the carpenter as a carpenter, the philosopher as a philosopher,
the rhetorician as a rhetorician. When then you say, "Come and hear me read to
you": take care first of all that you are not doing this without a purpose;
then, if you have discovered that you are doing this with reference to a
purpose, consider if it is the right purpose. Do you wish to do good or to be
praised? Immediately you hear him saying, "To me what is the value of praise
from the many?" and he says well, for it is of no value to a musician, so far
as he is a musician, nor to a geometrician. Do you then wish to be useful? in
what? tell us that we may run to your audience-room. Now can a man do anything
useful to others, who has not received something useful himself? No, for
neither can a man do anything useful in the carpenter's art, unless he is a
carpenter; nor in the shoemaker's art, unless he is a shoemaker.
    Do you wish to know then if you have received any advantage? Produce your
opinions, philosopher. What is the thing which desire promises? Not to fall in
the object. What does aversion promise? Not to fall into that which you would
avoid. Well; do we fulfill their promise? Tell me the truth; but if you lie, I
will tell you. Lately when your hearers came together rather coldly, and did
not give you applause, you went away humbled. Lately again when you had been
praised, you went about and said to all, "What did you think of me?"
"Wonderful, master, I swear by all that is dear to me." "But how did I treat of
that particular matter?" "Which?" "The passage in which I described Pan and the
nymphs?" "Excellently." Then do you tell me that in desire and in aversion you
are acting according to nature? Begone; try to persuade somebody else. Did you
not praise a certain person contrary to your opinion? and did you not flatter a
certain person who was the son of a senator? Would you wish your own children
to be such persons? "I hope not." Why then did you praise and flatter him? "He
is an ingenuous youth and listens well to discourses." How is this? "He admires
me." You have stated your proof. Then what do you think? do not these very
people secretly despise you? When, then, a man who is conscious that he has
neither done any good nor ever thinks of it, finds a philosopher who says, "You
have a great natural talent, and you have a candid and good disposition," what
else do you think that he says except this, "This man has some need of me?" Or
tell me what act that indicates a, great mind has he shown? Observe; he has
been in your company a long time; he has listened to your discourses, he has
heard you reading; has he become more modest? has he been turned to reflect on
himself? has he perceived in what a bad state he is? has he cast away
self-conceit? does he look for a person to teach him? "He does." A man who will
teach him to live? No, fool, but how to talk; for it is for this that he
admires you also. Listen and hear what he says: "This man writes with perfect
art, much better than Dion." This is altogether another thing. Does he say,
"This man is modest, faithful, free from perturbations?" and even if he did say
it, I should say to him, "Since this man is faithful, tell me what this
faithful man is." And if he could not tell me, I should add this, "First
understand what you say, then speak."
    You, then, who are in a wretched plight and gaping after applause and
counting your auditors, do you intend to be useful to others? "To-day many more
attended my discourse." "Yes, many; we suppose five hundred." "That is nothing;
suppose that there were a thousand." "Dion never had so many hearers." "How
could he?" "And they understand what is said beautifully." "What is fine,
master, can move even a stone." See, these are the words of a philosopher. This
is the disposition of a man who will do good to others; here is a man who has
listened to discourses, who has read what is written about Socrates as
Socratic, not as the compositions of Lysias and Isocrates. "I have often
wondered by what arguments." Not so, but "by what argument": this is more exact
than that. What, have you read the words at all in a different way from that in
which you read little odes? For if you read them as you ought, you would not
have been attending to such matters, but you would rather have been looking to
these words: "Anytus and Meletus are able to kill me, but they cannot harm me":
and "I am always of such a disposition as to pay regard to nothing of my own
except to the reason which on inquiry seems to me the best." Hence who ever
heard Socrates say, "I know something and I teach"; but he used to send
different people to different teachers. Therefore they used to come to him and
ask to be introduced to philosophy by him; and he would take them and recommend
them. Not so; but as he accompanied them he would say, "Hear me to-day
discoursing in the house of Quadratus." Why should I hear you? Do you wish to
show me that you put words together cleverly? You put them together, man; and
what good will it do you? "But only praise me." What do you mean by praising?
"Say to me, "Admirable, wonderful." Well, I say so. But if that is praise
whatever it is which philosophers mean by the name of good, what have I to
praise in you? If it is good to speak well, teach me, and will praise you.
"What then? ought a man to listen to such things without pleasure?" I hope not.
For my part I do not listen even to a lute-player without pleasure. Must I then
for this reason stand and play the lute? Hear what Socrates says, "Nor would it
be seemly for a man of my age, like a young man composing addresses, to appear
before you." "Like a young man," he says. For in truth this small art is an
elegant thing, to select words, and to put them together, and to come forward
and gracefully to read them or to speak, and while he is reading to say, "There
are not many who can do these things, I swear by all that you value."
    Does a philosopher invite people to hear him? As the sun himself draws men
to him, or as food does, does not the philosopher also draw to him those who
will receive benefit? What physician invites a man to be treated by him? Indeed
I now hear that even the physicians in Rome do invite patients, but when I
lived there, the physicians were invited. "I invite you to come and hear that
things are in a bad way for you, and that you are taking care of everything
except that of which you ought to take care, and that you are ignorant of the
good and the bad and are unfortunate and unhappy." A fine kind of invitation:
and yet if the words of the philosopher do not produce this effect on you, he
is dead, and so is the speaker. Rufus was used to say: "If you have leisure to
praise me, I am speaking to no purpose." Accordingly he used to speak in such a
way that every one of us who were sitting there supposed that some one had
accused him before Rufus: he so touched on what was doing, he so placed before
the eyes every man's faults.
    The philosopher's school, ye men, is a surgery: you ought not to go out of
it with pleasure, but with pain. For you are not in sound health when you
enter: one has dislocated his shoulder, another has an abscess, a third a
fistula, and a fourth a headache. Then do I sit and utter to you little
thoughts and exclamations that you may praise me and go away, one with his
shoulder in the same condition in which he entered, another with his head still
aching, and a third with his fistula or his abscess just as they were? Is it
for this then that young men shall quit home, and leave their parents and their
friends and kinsmen and property, that they may say to you, "Wonderful!" when
you are uttering your exclamations. Did Socrates do this, or Zeno, or
Cleanthes?
    What then? is there not the hortatory style? Who denies it? as there is the
style of refutation, and the didactic style. Who, then, ever reckoned a fourth
style with these, the style of display? What is the hortatory style? To be able
to show both to one person and to many the struggle in which they are engaged,
and that they think more about anything than about what they really wish. For
they wish the things which lead to happiness, but they look for them in the
wrong place. In order that this may be done, a thousand seats must be placed
and men must be invited to listen, and you must ascend the pulpit in a fine
robe or cloak and describe the death of Achilles. Cease, I entreat you by the
gods, to spoil good words and good acts as much as you can. Nothing can have
more power in exhortation than when the speaker shows to the hearers that he
has need of them. But tell me who when he hears you reading or discoursing is
anxious about himself or turns to reflect on himself? or when he has gone out
says, "The philosopher hit me well: I must no longer do these things." But does
he not, even if you have a great reputation, say to some person, "He spoke
finely about Xerxes"; and another says, "No, but about the battle of
Thermopylae"? Is this listening to a philosopher?



That we ought not to be moved by a desire of those things which are not in our
                                     power

    Let not that which in another is contrary to nature be an evil to you: for
you are not formed by nature to be depressed with others nor to be unhappy with
others, but to be happy with them. If a man is unhappy, remember that his
unhappiness is his own fault: for God has made all men to be happy, to be free
from perturbations. For this purpose he has given means to them, some things to
each person as his own, and other things not as his own: some things subject to
hindrance and compulsion and deprivation; and these things are not a man's own:
but the things which are not subject to hindrances are his own; and the nature
of good and evil, as it was fit to be done by him who takes care of us and
protects us like a father, he has made our own. "But," you say, "I have parted
from a certain person, and he is grieved." Why did he consider as his own that
which belongs to another? why, when he looked on you and was rejoiced, did he
not also reckon that you are mortal, that it is natural for you to part from
him for a foreign country? Therefore he suffers the consequences of his own
folly. But why do you or for what purpose bewail yourself? Is it that you also
have not thought of these things? but like poor women who are good for nothing,
you have enjoyed all things in which you took pleasure, as if you would always
enjoy them, both places and men and conversation; and now you sit and weep
because you do not see the same persons and do not live in the same places.
Indeed you deserve this, to be more wretched than crows and ravens who have the
power of flying where they please and changing their nests for others, and
crossing the seas without lamenting or regretting their former condition. "Yes,
but this happens to them because they are irrational creatures." Was reason,
then, given to us by the gods for the purpose of unhappiness and misery, that
we may pass our lives in wretchedness and lamentation? Must all persons be
immortal and must no man go abroad, and must we ourselves not go abroad, but
remain rooted like plants; and, if any of our familiar friends go abroad, must
we sit and weep; and, on the contrary, when he returns, must we dance and clap
our hands like children?
    Shall we not now wean ourselves and remember what we have heard from the
philosophers? if we did not listen to them as if they were jugglers: they tell
us that this world is one city, and the substance out of which it has been
formed is one, and that there must be a certain period, and that some things
must give way to others, that some must be dissolved, and others come in their
place; some to remain in the same place, and others to be moved; and that all
things are full of friendship, first of the gods, and then of men who by nature
are made to be of one family; and some must be with one another, and others
must be separated, rejoicing in those who are with them, and not grieving for
those who are removed from them; and man in addition to being by nature of a
noble temper and having a contempt of all things which are not in the power of
his will, also possesses this property, not to be rooted nor to be naturally
fixed to the earth, but to go at different times to different places, sometimes
from the urgency of certain occasions, and at others merely for the sake of
seeing. So it was with Ulysses, who saw
       Of many men the states, and learned their ways.
And still earlier it was the fortune of Hercules to visit all the inhabited
world
       Seeing men's lawless deeds and their good rules of law:
casting out and clearing away their lawlessness and introducing in their place
good rules of law. And yet how many friends do you think that he had in Thebes,
how many in Argos, how many in Athens? and how many do you think that he gained
by going about? And he married also, when it seemed to him a proper occasion,
and begot children, and left them without lamenting or regretting or leaving
them as orphans; for he knew that no man is an orphan; but it is the father who
takes care of all men always and continuously. For it was not as mere report
that he had heard that Zeus is the father of for he thought that Zeus was his
own father, and he called him so, and to him he looked when he was doing what
he did. Therefore he was enabled to live happily in all places. And it is never
possible for happiness and desire of what is not present to come together. that
which is happy must have all that desires, must resemble a person who is filled
with food, and must have neither thirst nor hunger. "But Ulysses felt a desire
for his wife and wept as he sat on a rock." Do you attend to Homer and his
stories in everything? Or if Ulysses really wept, what was he else than an
unhappy man? and what good man is unhappy? In truth, the whole is badly
administered, if Zeus does not take care of his own citizens that they may be
happy like himself. But these things are not lawful nor right to think of: and
if Ulysses did weep and lament, he was not a good man. For who is good if he
knows not who he is? and who knows what he is, if he forgets that things which
have been made are perishable, and that it is not possible for one human being
to be with another always? To desire, then, things which are impossible is to
have a slavish character and is foolish: it is the part of a stranger, of a man
who fights against God in the only way that he can, by his opinions.
    "But my mother laments when she does not see me." Why has she not learned
these principles? and I do not say this, that we should not take care that she
may not lament, but I say that we ought not to desire in every way what is not
our own. And the sorrow of another is another's sorrow: but my sorrow is my
own. I, then, will stop my own sorrow by every means, for it is in my power:
and the sorrow of another I will endeavor to stop as far as I can; but I will
not attempt to do it by every means; for if I do, I shall be fighting against
God, I shall be opposing and shall be placing myself against him in the
administration of the universe; and the reward of this fighting against God and
of this disobedience not only will the children of my children pay, but I also
shall myself, both by day and by night, startled by dreams, perturbed,
trembling at every piece of news, and having my tranquillity depending on the
letters of others. Some person has arrived from Rome. "I only hope that there
is no harm." But what harm can happen to you, where you are not? From Hellas
some one is come: "I hope that there is no harm." In this way every place may
be the cause of misfortune to you. Is it not enough for you to be unfortunate
there where you are, and must you be so even beyond sea, and by the report of
letters? Is this the way in which your affairs are in a state of security?
"Well, then, suppose that my friends have died in the places which are far from
me." What else have they suffered than that which is the condition of mortals?
Or how are you desirous at the same time to live to old age, and at the same
time not to see the death of any person whom you love? Know you not that in the
course of a long time many and various kinds of things must happen; that a
fever shall overpower one, a robber another, and a third a tyrant? Such is the
condition of things around us, such are those who live with us in the world:
cold and heat, and unsuitable ways of living, and journeys by land, and voyages
by sea, and winds, and various circumstances which surround us, destroy one
man, and banish another, and throw one upon an embassy and another into an
army. Sit down, then, in a flutter at all these things, lamenting, unhappy,
unfortunate, dependent on another, and dependent not on one or two, but on ten
thousands upon ten thousands.
    Did you hear this when you were with the philosophers? did you learn this?
do you not know that human life is a warfare? that one man must keep watch,
another must go out as a spy, and a third must fight? and it is not possible
that all should be in one place, nor is it better that it be so. But you,
neglecting neglecting to do the commands of the general, complain when anything
more hard than usual is imposed on you, and you do not observe what you make
the army become as far as it is in your power; that if all imitate you, no man
will dig a trench, no man will put a rampart round, nor keep watch, nor expose
himself to danger, but will appear to be useless for the purposes of an army.
Again, in a vessel if you go as a sailor, keep to one place and stick to it.
And if you are ordered to climb the mast, refuse; if to run to the head of the
ship, refuse; and what master, of a ship will endure you? and will he not pitch
you overboard as a useless thing, an impediment only and bad example to the
other sailors? And so it is here also: every man's life is a kind of warfare,
and it is long and diversified. You must observe the duty of a soldier and do
everything at the nod of the general; if it is possible, divining what his
wishes are: for there is no resemblance between that general and this, neither
in strength nor in superiority of character. You are placed in a great office
of command and not in any mean place; but you are always a senator. Do you not
know that such a man must give little time to the affairs of his household, but
be often away from home, either as a governor or one who is governed, or
discharging some office, or serving in war or acting as a judge? Then do you
tell me that you wish, as a plant, to be fixed to the same places and to be
rooted? "Yes, for it is pleasant." Who says that it is not? but a soup is
pleasant, and a handsome woman is pleasant. What else do those say who make
pleasure their end? Do you not see of what men yon have uttered the language?
that it is the language of Epicureans and catamites? Next while you are doing
what they do and holding their opinions, do you speak to us the words of Zeno
and of Socrates? Will you not throw away as far as you can the things belonging
to others with which you decorate yourself, though they do not fit you at all?
For what else do they desire than to sleep without hindrance and free from
compulsion, and when they have risen to yawn at their leisure, and to wash the
face, then write and read what they choose, and then talk about some trifling
matter being praised by their friends whatever they may say, then to go forth
for a walk, and having walked about a little to bathe, and then eat and sleep,
such sleep as is the fashion of such men? why need we say how? for one can
easily conjecture. Come, do you also tell your own way of passing the time
which you desire, you who are an admirer of truth and of Socrates and Diogenes.
What do you wish to do in Athens? the same, or something else? Why then do you
call yourself a Stoic? Well, but they who falsely call themselves Roman
citizens, are severely punished; and should those, who falsely claim so great
and reverend a thing and name, get off unpunished? or is this not possible, but
the law divine and strong and inevitable is this, which exacts the severest
punishments from those who commit the greatest crimes? For what does this law
say? "Let him who pretends to things which do not belong to him be a boaster, a
vainglorious man: let him who disobeys the divine administration be base, and a
slave; let him suffer grief, let him be envious, let him pity; and in a word
let him be unhappy and lament."
    "Well then; do you wish me to pay court to a certain person? to go to his
doors?" If reason requires this to be done for the sake of country, for the
sake of kinsmen, for the sake of mankind, why should you not go? You are not
ashamed to go to the doors of a shoemaker, when you are in want of shoes, nor
to the door of a gardener, when you want lettuces; and are you ashamed to go to
the doors of the rich when you want anything? "Yes, for I have no awe of a
shoemaker." Don't feel any awe of the rich. "Nor will I flatter the gardener."
And do not flatter the rich. "How, then, shall I get what I want?" Do I say to
you, "Go as if you were certain to get what you want"? And do not I only tell
you that you may do what is becoming to yourself? "Why, then, should I still
go?" That you may have gone, that you may have discharged the duty of a
citizen, of a brother, of a friend. And further remember that you have gone to
the shoemaker, to the seller of vegetables, who have no power in anything great
or noble, though he may sell dear. You go to buy lettuces: they cost an obolus,
but not a talent. So it is here also. The matter is worth going for to the rich
man's door. Well, I will go. It is worth talking about. Let it be so; I will
talk with him. But you must also kiss his hand and flatter him with praise.
Away with that, it is a talent's worth: it is not profitable to me, nor to the
state nor to my friends, to have done that which spoils a good citizen and a
friend. "But you seem not to have been eager about the matter, if you do not
succeed." Have you again forgotten why you went? Know you not that a good man
does nothing for the sake of appearance, but for the sake of doing right? "What
advantage is it, then, to him to have done right?" And what advantage is it to
a man who writes the name of Dion to write it as he ought? The advantage is to
have written it. "Is there no reward then?" Do you seek a reward for a good man
greater than doing what is good and just? At Olympia you wish for nothing more,
but it seems to you enough to be crowned at the games. Does it seem to you so
small and worthless a thing to be good and happy? For these purposes being
introduced by the gods into this city, and it being now your duty to undertake
the work of a man, do you still want nurses also and a mamma, and do foolish
women by their weeping move you and make you effeminate? Will you thus never
cease to be a foolish child? know you not that he who does the acts of a child,
the older he is, the more ridiculous he is?
    In Athens did you see no one by going to his house? "I visited any man that
I pleased." Here also be ready to see, and you will see whom you please: only
let it be without meanness, neither with desire nor with aversion, and your
affairs will be well managed. But this result does not depend on going nor on
standing at the doors, but it depends on what is within, on your opinions. When
you have learned not to value things which are external, and not dependent on
the will, and to consider that not one of them is your own, but that these
things only are your own, to exercise the judgment well, to form opinions, to
move toward an object, to desire, to turn from a thing, where is there any
longer room for flattery, where for meanness? why do you still long for the
quiet there, and for the places to which you are accustomed? Wait a little and
you will again find these places familiar: then, if you are of so ignoble a
nature, again if you leave these also, weep and lament.
    "How then shall I become of an affectionate temper?" By being of a noble
disposition, and happy. For it is not reasonable to be means-spirited nor to
lament yourself, nor to depend on another, nor even to blame God or man. I
entreat you, become an affectionate person in this way, by observing these
rules. But if through this affection, as you name it, you are going to be a
slave and wretched, there is no profit in being affectionate. And what prevents
you from loving another as a person subject to mortality, as one who may go
away from you. Did not Socrates love his own children? He did; but it was as a
free man, as one who remembered that he must first be a friend to the gods. For
this reason he violated nothing which was becoming to a good man, neither in
making his defense nor by fixing a penalty on himself, nor even in the former
part of his life when he was a senator or when be was a soldier. But we are
fully supplied with every pretext for being of ignoble temper, some for the
sake of a child, some for a mother, and others for brethren's sake. But it is
not fit for us to be unhappy on account of any person, but to be happy on
account of all, but chiefly on account of God who has made us for this end.
Well, did Diogenes love nobody, who was so kind and so much a lover of all that
for mankind in general he willingly undertook so much labour and bodily
sufferings? He did love mankind, but how? As became a minister of God, at the
same time caring for men, and being also subject to God. For this reason all
the earth was his country, and no particular place; and when he was taken
prisoner he did not regret Athens nor his associates and friends there, but
even he became familiar with the pirates and tried to improve them; and being
sold afterward he lived in Corinth as before at Athens; and he would have
behaved the same, if he had gone to the country of the Perrhaebi. Thus is
freedom acquired. For this reason he used to say, "Ever since Antisthenes made
me free, I have not been a slave." How did Antisthenes make him free? Hear what
he says: "Antisthenes taught me what is my own, and what is not my own;
possessions are not my own, nor kinsmen, domestics, friends, nor reputation,
nor places familiar, nor mode of life; all these belong to others." What then
is your own? "The use of appearances. This be showed to me, that I possess it
free from hindrance, and from compulsion, no person can put an obstacle in my
way, no person can force me to use appearances otherwise than I wish." Who then
has any power over me? Philip or Alexander, or Perdiccas or the Great King? How
have they this power? For if a man is going to be overpowered by a man, he must
long before be overpowered by things. If, then, pleasure is not able to subdue
a man, nor pain, nor fame, nor wealth, but he is able, when he chooses, to spit
out all his poor body in a man's face and depart from life, whose slave can he
still be? But if he dwelt with pleasure in Athens, and was overpowered by this
manner of life, his affairs would have been at every man's command; the
stronger would have had the power of grieving him. How do you think that
Diogenes would have flattered the pirates that they might sell him to some
Athenian, that some time he might see that beautiful Piraeus, and the Long
Walls and the Acropolis? In what condition would you see them? As a captive, a
slave and mean: and what would be the use of it for you? "Not so: but I should
see them as a free man." Show me, how you would be free. Observe, some person
has caught you, who leads you away from your accustomed place of abode and
says, "You are my slave, for it is in my power to hinder you from living as you
please, it is in my power to treat you gently, and to humble you: when I
choose, on the contrary you are cheerful and go elated to Athens." What do you
say to him who treats you as a slave? What means have you of finding one who
will rescue you from slavery? Or cannot you even look him in the face, but
without saying more do you entreat to be set free? Man, you ought to go gladly
to prison, hastening, going before those who lead you there. Then, I ask you,
are you unwilling to live in Rome and desire to live in Hellas? And when you
must die, will you then also fill us with your lamentations, because you will
not see Athens nor walk about in the Lyceion? Have you gone abroad for this?
was it for this reason you have sought to find some person from whom you might
receive benefit? What benefit? That you may solve syllogisms more readily, or
handle hypothetical arguments? and for this reason did you leave brother,
country, friends, your family, that you might return when you had learned these
things? So you did not go abroad to obtain constancy of mind, nor freedom from
perturbation, nor in order that, being secure from harm, you may never complain
of any person, accuse no person, and no man may wrong you, and thus you may
maintain your relative position without impediment? This is a fine traffic that
you have gone abroad for in syllogisms and sophistical arguments and
hypothetical: if you like, take your place in the agora and proclaim them for
sale like dealers in physic. Will you not deny even all that you have learned
that you may not bring a bad name on your theorems as useless? What harm has
philosophy done you? Wherein has Chrysippus injured you that you should prove
by your acts that his labours are useless? Were the evils that you had there
not enough, those which were the cause of your pain and lamentation, even if
you had not gone abroad? Have you added more to the list? And if you again have
other acquaintances and friends, you will have more causes for lamentation; and
the same also if you take an affection for another country. Why, then, do you
live to surround yourself with other sorrows upon sorrows through which you are
unhappy? Then, I ask you, do you call this affection? What affection, man! If
it is a good thing, it is the cause of no evil: if it is bad, I have nothing to
do with it. I am formed by nature for my own good: I am not formed for my own
evil.
    What then is the discipline for this purpose? First of all the highest and
the principal, and that which stands as it were at the entrance, is this; when
you are delighted with anything, be delighted as with a thing which is not one
of those which cannot be taken away, but as with something of such a kind, as
an earthen pot is, or a glass cup, that, when it has been broken, you may
remember what it was and may not be troubled. So in this matter also: if you
kiss your own child, or your brother or friend, never give full license to the
appearance, and allow not your pleasure to go as far as it chooses; but check
it, and curb it as those who stand behind men in their triumphs and remind them
that they are mortal. Do you also remind yourself in like manner, that he whom
you love is mortal, and that what you love is nothing of your own: it has been
given to you for the present, not that it should not be taken from you, nor has
it been given to you for all time, but as a fig is given to you or a bunch of
grapes at the appointed season of the year. But if you wish for these things in
winter, you are a fool. So if you wish for your son or friend when it is not
allowed to you, you must know that you are wishing for a fig in winter. For
such as winter is to a fig, such is every event which happens from the universe
to the things which are taken away according to its nature. And further, at the
times when you are delighted with a thing, place before yourself the contrary
appearances. What harm is it while you are kissing your child to say with a
lisping voice, "To-morrow you will die"; and to a friend also, "To-morrow you
will go away or I shall, and never shall we see one another again"? "But these
are words of bad omen." And some incantations also are of bad omen; but because
they are useful, I don't care for this; only let them be useful. "But do you
call things to be of bad omen except those which are significant of some evil?"
Cowardice is a word of bad omen, and meanness of spirit, and sorrow, and grief
and shamelessness. These words are of bad omen: and yet we ought not to
hesitate to utter them in order to protect ourselves against the things. Do you
tell me that a name which is significant of any natural thing is of evil omen?
say that even for the ears of corn to be reaped is of bad omen, for it
signifies the destruction of the ears, but not of the world. Say that the
falling of the leaves also is of bad omen, and for the dried fig to take the
place of the green fig, and for raisins to be made from the grapes. For all
these things are changes from a former state into other states; not a
destruction, but a certain fixed economy and administration. Such is going away
from home and a small change: such is death, a greater change, not from the
state which now is to that which is not, but to that which is not now. "Shall I
then no longer exist?" You will not exist, but you be something else, of which
the world now has need: for you also came into existence not when you chose,
but when the world had need of you.
    Wherefore the wise and good man, remembering who he is and whence he came,
and by whom he was produced, is attentive only to this, how he may fill his
place with due regularity and obediently to God. "Dost Thou still wish me to
exist? I will continue to exist as free, as noble in nature, as Thou hast
wished me to exist: for Thou hast made me free from hindrance in that which is
my own. But hast Thou no further need of me? I thank Thee; and so far I have
remained for Thy sake, and for the sake of no other person, and now in
obedience to Thee I depart." "How dost thou depart?" Again, I say, as Thou hast
pleased, as free, as Thy servant, as one who has known Thy commands and Thy
prohibitions. And so long as I shall stay in Thy service, whom dost Thou will
me to be? A prince or a private man, a senator or a common person, a soldier or
a general, a teacher or a master of a family? whatever place and position Thou
mayest assign to me, as Socrates says, "I will die ten thousand times rather
than desert them." And where dost Thou will me to be? in Rome or Athens, or
Thebes or Gyara. Only remember me there where I am. If Thou sendest me to a
place where there are no means for men living according to nature, I shall not
depart in disobedience to Thee, but as if Thou wast giving me the signal to
retreat: I do not leave Thee, let this be to from my intention, but perceive
that Thou hast no need of me. If means of living according to nature be allowed
me, I will seek no other place than that in which I am, or other men than those
among whom I am.
    Let these thoughts be ready to hand by night and by day: these you should
write, these you should read: about these you should talk to yourself, and to
others. Ask a man, "Can you help me at all for this purpose?" and further, go
to another and to another. Then if anything that is said he contrary to your
wish, this reflection first will immediately relieve you, that it is not
unexpected. For it is a great thing in all cases to say, "I knew that I begot a
son who is mortal." For so you also will say, "I knew that I am mortal, I knew
that I may leave my home, I knew that I may be ejected from it, I knew that I
may be led to prison." Then if you turn round, and look to yourself, and seek
the place from which comes that which has happened, you will forthwith
recollect that it comes from the place of things which are out of the power of
the will, and of things which are not my own. "What then is it to me?" Then,
you will ask, and this is the chief thing: "And who is it that sent it?" The
leader, or the general, the state, the law of the state. Give it me then, for I
must always obey the law in everything. Then, when the appearance pains you,
for it is not in your power to prevent this, contend against it by the aid of
reason, conquer it: do not allow it to gain strength nor to lead you to the
consequences by raising images such as it pleases and as it pleases. If you be
in Gyara, do not imagine the mode of living at Rome, and how many pleasures
there were for him who lived there and how many there would be for him who
returned to Rome: but fix your mind on this matter, how a man who lives in
Gyara ought to live in Gyara like a man of courage. And if you be in Rome, do
not imagine what the life in Athens is, but think only of the life in Rome.
    Then in the place of all other delights substitute this, that of being
conscious that you are obeying God, that, not in word but in deed, you are
performing the acts of a wise and good man. For what a thing it is for a man to
be able to say to himself, "Now, whatever the rest may say in solemn manner in
the schools and may be judged to be saying in a way contrary to common opinion,
this I am doing; and they are sitting and are discoursing of my virtues and
inquiring about me and praising me; and of this Zeus has willed that I shall
receive from myself a demonstration, and shall myself know if He has a soldier
such as He ought to have, a citizen such as He ought to have, and if He has
chosen to produce me to the rest of mankind as a witness of the things which
are independent of the will: 'See that you fear without reason, that you
foolishly desire what you do desire: seek not the good in things external; seek
it in yourselves: if you do not, you will not find it.' For this purpose He
leads me at one time hither, at another time sends me thither, shows me to men
as poor, without authority, and sick; sends me to Gyara, leads me into prison,
not because He hates me, far from him be such a meaning, for who hates the best
of his servants? nor yet because He cares not for me, for He does not neglect
any even of the smallest things;' but He does this for the purpose of
exercising me and making use of me as a witness to others. Being appointed to
such a service, do I still care about the place in which I am, or with whom I
am, or what men say about me? and do I not entirely direct my thoughts to God
and to His instructions and commands?"
    Having these things always in hand, and exercising them by yourself, and
keeping them in readiness, you will never be in want of one to comfort you and
strengthen you. For it is not shameful to be without something to eat, but not
to have reason sufficient for keeping away fear and sorrow. But if once you
have gained exemption from sorrow and fear, will there any longer be a tyrant
for you, or a tyrant's guard, or attendants on Caesar? Or shall any appointment
to offices at court cause you pain, or shall those who sacrifice in the
Capitol, on the occasion of being named to certain functions, cause pain to you
who have received so great authority from Zeus? Only do not make a proud
display of it, nor boast of it; but show it by your acts; and if no man
perceives it, be satisfied that you are yourself in a healthy state and happy.


To those who fall off from their purpose

    Consider as to the things which you proposed to yourself at first, which
you have secured and which you have not; and how you are pleased when you
recall to memory the one and are pained about the other; and if it is possible,
recover the things wherein you failed. For we must not shrink when we are
engaged in the greatest combat, but we must even take blows. For the combat
before us is not in wrestling and the Pancration, in which both the successful
and the unsuccessful may have the greatest merit, or may have little, and in
truth may be very fortunate or very unfortunate; but the combat is for good
fortune and happiness themselves. Well then, even if we have renounced the
contest in this matter, no man hinders us from renewing the combat again, and
we are not compelled to wait for another four years that the games at Olympia
may come again; but as soon as you have recovered and restored yourself, and
employ the same zeal, you may renew the combat again; and if again you renounce
it, you may again renew it; and if you once gain the victory, you are like him
who has never renounced the combat. Only do not, through a habit of doing the
same thing, begin to do it with pleasure, and then like a bad athlete go about
after being conquered in all the circuit of the games like quails who have run
away.
    "The sight of a beautiful young girl overpowers me. Well, have I not been
overpowered before? An inclination arises in me to find fault with a person;
for have I not found fault with him before?" You speak to us as if you had come
off free from harm, just as if a man should say to his physician who forbids
him to bathe, "Have I not bathed before?" If, then, the physician can say to
him, "Well, and what, then, happened to you after the bath? Had you not a
fever, had you not a headache?" And when you found fault with a person lately,
did you not do the act of a malignant person, of a trifling babbler; did you
not cherish this habit in you by adding to it the corresponding acts? And when
you were overpowered by the young girl, did you come off unharmed? Why, then,
do you talk of what you did before? You ought, I think, remembering what you
did, as slaves remember the blows which they have received, to abstain from the
same faults. But the one case is not like the other; for in the case of slaves
the pain causes the remembrance: but in the case of your faults, what is the
pain, what is the punishment; for when have you been accustomed to fly from
evil acts? Sufferings, then, of the trying character are useful to us, whether
we choose or not.



To those who fear want

    Are you not ashamed at more cowardly and more mean than fugitive slaves?
How do they when they run away leave their masters? on what estates do they
depend, and what domestics do they rely on? Do they not, after stealing a
little which is enough for the first days, then afterward move on through land
or through sea, contriving one method after another for maintaining their
lives? And what fugitive slave ever died of hunger? But you are afraid lest
necessary things should fall you, and are sleepless by night. Wretch, are you
so blind, and don't you see the road to which the want of necessaries leads?
"Well, where does it lead?" To the same place to which a fever leads, or a
stone that falls on you, to death. Have you not often said this yourself to
your companions? have you not read much of this kind, and written much? and how
often have you boasted that you were easy as to death?
    "Yes: but my wife and children also suffer hunger." Well then, does their
hunger lead to any other place? Is there not the same descent to some place for
them also? Is not there the same state below for them? Do you not choose, then,
to look to that place full of boldness against every want and deficiency, to
that place to which both the richest and those who have held the highest
offices, and kings themselves and tyrants must descend? or to which you will
descend hungry, if it should so happen, but they burst by indigestion and
drunkenness. What beggar did you hardly ever see who was not an old man, and
even of extreme old age? But chilled with cold day and night, and lying on the
ground, and eating only what is absolutely necessary they approach near to the
impossibility of dying. Cannot you write? Cannot you teach children? Cannot you
be a watchman at another person's door? "But it is shameful to come to such
necessity." Learn, then, first what are the things which are shameful, and then
tell us that you are a philosopher: but at present do not, even if any other
man call you so, allow it.
    Is that shameful to you which is not your own act, that of which you are
not the cause, that which has come to you by accident, as a headache, as a
fever? If your parents were poor, and left their property to others, and if
while they live, they do not help you at all, is this shameful to you? Is this
what you learned with the philosophers? Did you never hear that the thing which
is shameful ought to be blamed, and that which is blamable is worthy of blame?
Whom do you blame for an act which is not his own, which he did not do himself?
Did you, then, make your father such as he is, or is it in your power to
improve him? Is this power given to you? Well then, ought you to wish the
things which are not given to you, or to be ashamed if you do not obtain them?
And have you also been accustomed while you were studying philosophy to look to
others and to hope for nothing from yourself? Lament then and groan and eat
with fear that you may not have food to-morrow. Tremble about your poor slaves
lest they steal, lest they run away, lest they die. So live, and continue to
live, you who in name only have approached philosophy and have disgraced its
theorems as far as you can by showing them to be useless and unprofitable to
those who take them up; you who have never sought constancy, freedom from
perturbation, and from passions: you who have not sought any person for the
sake of this object, but many for the sake of syllogisms; you who have never
thoroughly examined any of these appearances by yourself, "Am I able to bear,
or am I not able to bear? What remains for me to do?" But as if all your
affairs were well and secure, you have been resting on the third topic, that of
things being unchanged, in order that you may possess unchanged- what?
cowardice, mean spirit, the admiration of the rich, desire without attaining
any end, and avoidance which fails in the attempt? About security in these
things you have been anxious.
    Ought you not to have gained something in addition from reason and, then,
to have protected this with security? And whom did you ever see building a
battlement all round and not encircling it with a wall? And what doorkeeper is
placed with no door to watch? But you practice in order to be able to prove-
what? You practice that you may not be tossed as on the sea through sophisms,
and tossed about from what? Show me first what you hold, what you measure, or
what you weigh; and show me the scales or the medimnus; or how long will you go
on measuring the dust? Ought you not to demonstrate those things which make men
happy, which make things go on for them in the way as they wish, and why we
ought to blame no man, accuse no man, and acquiesce in the administration of
the universe? Show me these. "See, I show them: I will resolve syllogisms for
you." This is the measure, slave; but it is not the thing measured. Therefore
you are now paying the penalty for what you neglected, philosophy: you tremble,
you lie awake, you advise with all persons; and if your deliberations are not
likely to please all, you think that you have deliberated ill. Then you fear
hunger, as you suppose: but it is not hunger that you fear, but you are afraid
that you will not have a cook, that you will not have another to purchase
provisions for the table, a third to take off your shoes, a fourth to dress
you, others to rub you, and to follow you, in order that in the bath, when you
have taken off your clothes and stretched yourself out like those who are
crucified you may be rubied on this side and on that, and then the aliptes may
say, "Change his position, present the side, take hold of his head, show the
shoulder"; and then when you have left the bath and gone home, you may call
out, "Does no one bring something to eat?" And then, "Take away the tables,
sponge them": you are afraid of this, that you may not be able to lead the life
of a sick man. But learn the life of those who are in health, how slaves live,
how labourers, how those live who are genuine philosophers; how Socrates lived,
who had a wife and children; how Diogenes lived, and how Cleanthes, who
attended to the school and drew water. If you choose to have these things, you
will have them everywhere, and you will live in full confidence. Confiding in
what? In that alone in which a man can confide, in that which is secure, in
that which is not subject to hindrance, in that which cannot be taken away,
that is, in your own will. And why have you made yourself so useless and good
for nothing that no man will choose to receive you into his house, no man to
take care of you? but if a utensil entire and useful were cast abroad, every
man who found it would take it up and think it a gain; but no man will take you
up, and every man will consider you a loss. So cannot you discharge the office
of a dog, or of a cock? Why then do you choose to live any longer, when you are
what you are?
    Does any good man fear that he shall fall to have food? To the blind it
does not fall, to the lame it does not: shall it fall to a good man? And to a
good soldier there does not fail to one who gives him pay, nor to a labourer,
nor to a shoemaker: and to the good man shall there be wanting such a person?
Does God thus neglect the things that He has established, His ministers, His
witnesses, whom alone He employs as examples to the uninstructed, both that He
exists, and administers well the whole, and does not neglect human affairs, and
that to a good man there is no evil either when he is living or when he is
dead? What, then, when He does not supply him with food? What else does He do
than like a good general He has given me the signal to retreat? I obey, I
follow, assenting to the words of the Commander, praising, His acts: for I came
when it pleased Him, and I will also go away when it pleases Him; and while I
lived, it was my duty to praise God both by myself, and to each person
severally and to many. He does not supply me with many things, nor with
abundance, He does not will me to live luxuriously; for neither did He supply
Hercules who was his own son; but another was king of Argos and Mycenae, and
Hercules obeyed orders, and laboured, and was exercised. And Eurystheus was
what he was, neither kin, of Argos nor of Mycenae, for he was not even king of
himself; but Hercules was ruler and leader of the whole earth and sea, who
purged away lawlessness, and introduced justice and holiness; and he did these
things both naked and alone. And when Ulysses was cast out shipwrecked, did
want humiliate him, did it break his spirit? but how did he go off to the
virgins to ask for necessaries, to beg which is considered most shameful?
       As a lion bred in the mountains trusting in his strength.
    Relying on what? Not on reputation nor on wealth nor on the power of a
magistrate, but on his own strength, that is, on his opinions about the things
which are in our power and those which, are not. For these are the only things
which make men free, which make them escape from hindrance, which raise the
head of those who are depressed, which make them look with steady eyes on the
rich and on tyrants. And this was the gift given to the philosopher. But you
will not come forth bold, but trembling about your trifling garments and silver
vessels. Unhappy man, have you thus wasted your time till now?
    "What, then, if I shall be sick?" You will be sick in such a way as you
ought to be. "Who will take care of me?" God; your friends. "I shall lie down
on a hard bed." But you will lie down like a man. "I shall not have a
convenient chamber." You will be sick in an inconvenient chamber. "Who will
provide for me the necessary food?" Those who provide for others also. You will
be sick like Manes. "And what, also, will be the end of the sickness? Any other
than death?" Do you then consider that this the chief of all evils to man and
the chief mark of mean spirit and of cowardice is not death, but rather the
fear of death? Against this fear then I advise you to exercise yourself: to
this let all your reasoning tend, your exercises, and reading; and you will
know that thus only are men made free.

----------------------------------------------------------------------



About freedom

    He is free who lives as he wishes to live; who is neither subject to
compulsion nor to hindrance, nor to force; whose movements to action are not
impeded, whose desires attain their purpose, and who does not fall into that
which he would avoid. Who, then, chooses to live in error? No man. Who chooses
to live deceived, liable to mistake, unjust, unrestrained, discontented, mean?
No man. Not one then of the bad lives as he wishes; nor is he, then, free. And
who chooses to live in sorrow, fear, envy, pity, desiring and failing in his
desires, attempting to avoid something and falling into it? Not one. Do we then
find any of the bad free from sorrow, free from fear, who does not fall into
that which he would avoid, and does not obtain that which he wishes? Not one;
nor then do we find any bad man free.
    If, then, a man who has been twice consul should hear this, if you add,
"But you are a wise man; this is nothing to you": he will pardon you. But if
you tell him the truth, and say, "You differ not at all from those who have
been thrice sold as to being yourself not a slave," what else ought you to
expect than blows? For he says, "What, I a slave, I whose father was free,
whose mother was free, I whom no man can purchase: I am also of senatorial
rank, and a friend of Caesar, and I have been a consul, and I own many slaves."
In the first place, most excellent senatorial man, perhaps your father also was
a slave in the same kind of servitude, and your mother, and your grandfather
and all your ancestors in an ascending series. But even if they were as free as
it is possible, what is this to you? What if they were of a noble nature, and
you of a mean nature; if they were fearless, and you a coward; if they had the
power of self-restraint, and you are not able to exercise it.
    "And what," you may say, "has this to do with being a slave?" Does it seem
to you to be nothing to do a thing unwillingly, with compulsion, with groans,
has this nothing to do with being a slave? "It is something," you say: "but who
is able to compel me, except the lord of all, Caesar?" Then even you yourself
have admitted that you have one master. But that he is the common master of
all, as you say, let not this console you at all: but know that you are a slave
in a great family. So also the people of Nicopolis are used to exclaim, "By the
fortune of Caesar, are free."
    However, if you please, let us not speak of Caesar at present. But tell me
this: did you never love any person, a young girl, or slave, or free? What then
is this with respect to being a slave or free? Were you never commanded by the
person beloved to do something which you did not wish to do? have you never
flattered your little slave? have you never kissed her feet? And yet if any man
compelled you to kiss Caesar's feet, you would think it an insult and excessive
tyranny. What else, then, is slavery? Did you never go out by night to some
place whither you did not wish to go, did you not expend what you did not wish
to expend, did you not utter words with sighs and groans, did you not submit to
abuse and to be excluded? But if you are ashamed to confess your own acts, see
what Thrasonides says and does, who having seen so much military service as
perhaps not even you have, first of all went out by night, when Geta does not
venture out, but if he were compelled by his master, would have cried out much
and would have gone out lamenting his bitter slavery. Next, what does
Thrasonides say? "A worthless girl has enslaved me, me whom no enemy, ever
did." Unhappy man, who are the slave even of a girl, and a worthless girl. Why
then do you still call yourself free? and why do you talk of your service in
the army? Then he calls for a sword and is angry with him who out of kindness
refuses it; and he sends presents to her who hates him, and entreats and weeps,
and on the other hand, having had a little success, he is elated. But even then
how? was he free enough neither to desire nor to fear?
    Now consider in the case of animals, how we employ the notion of liberty.
Men keep tame lions shut up, and feed them, and some take them about; and who
will say that this lion is free? Is it not the fact that the more he lives at
his ease, so much the more he is in a slavish condition? and who if he had
perception and reason would wish to be one of these lions? Well, these birds
when they are caught and are kept shut up, how much do they suffer in their
attempts to escape? and some of them die of hunger rather than submit to such a
kind of life. And as many of them as live, hardly live and with suffering pine
away; and if they ever find any opening, they make their escape. So much do
they desire their natural liberty, and to be independent and free from
hindrance. And what harm is there to you in this? "What do you say? I am formed
by nature to fly where I choose, to live in the open air, to sing when I
choose: you deprive me of all this, and say, 'What harm is it to you?' For this
reason we shall say that those animals only are free which cannot endure
capture, but, as soon as they are caught, escape from captivity by death. So
Diogenes says that there is one way to freedom, and that is to die content: and
he writes to the Persian king, "You cannot enslave the Athenian state any more
than you can enslave fishes." "How is that? cannot I catch them?" "If you catch
them," says Diogenes, "they will immediately leave you, as fishes do; for if
you catch a fish, it dies; and if these men that are caught shall die, of what
use to you is the preparation for war?" These are the words of a free man who
had carefully examined the thing and, as was natural, had discovered it. But if
you look for it in a different place from where it is, what wonder if you never
find it?
    The slave wishes to be set free immediately. Why? Do you think that he
wishes to pay money to the collectors of twentieths? No; but because he
imagines that hitherto through not having obtained this, he is hindered and
unfortunate. "If I shall be set free, immediately it is all happiness, I care
for no man, I speak to all as an equal and, like to them, I go where I choose,
I come from any place I choose, and go where I choose." Then he is set free;
and forthwith having no place where he can eat, he looks for some man to
flatter, some one with whom he shall sup: then he either works with his body
and endures the most dreadful things; and if he can obtain a manger, he falls
into a slavery much worse than his former slavery; or even if he is become
rich, being a man without any knowledge of what is good, he loves some little
girl, and in his happiness laments and desires to be a slave again. He says,
"what evil did I suffer in my state of slavery? Another clothed me, another
supplied me with shoes, another fed me, another looked after me in sickness;
and I did only a few services for him. But now a wretched man, what things I
suffer, being a slave of many instead of to one. But however," he says, "if I
shall acquire rings, then I shall live most prosperously and happily." First,
in order to acquire these rings, he submits to that which he is worthy of;
then, when he has acquired them, it is again all the same. Then he says, "if I
shall be engaged in military service, I am free from all evils." He obtains
military service. He suffers as much as a flogged slave, and nevertheless he
asks for a second service and a third. After this, when he has put the
finishing stroke to his career and is become a senator, then he becomes a slave
by entering into the assembly, then he serves the finer and most splendid
slavery- not to be a fool, but to learn what Socrates taught, what is the
nature of each thing that exists, and that a man should not rashly adapt
preconceptions to the several things which are. For this is the cause to men of
all their evils, the not being able to adapt the general preconceptions to the
several things. But we have different opinions. One man thinks that he is sick:
not so however, but the fact is that he does not adapt his preconceptions
right. Another thinks that he is poor; another that he has a severe father or
mother; and another, again, that Caesar is not favourable to him. But all this
is one and only one thing, the not knowing how to adapt the preconceptions. For
who has not a preconception of that which is bad, that it is hurtful, that it
ought to be avoided, that it ought in every way to be guarded against? One
preconception is not repugnant to another, only where it comes to the matter of
adaptation. What then is this evil, which is both hurtful, and a thing to be
avoided? He answers, "Not to be Caesar's friend." He is gone far from the mark,
he has missed the adaptation, he is embarrassed, he seeks the things which are
not at all pertinent to the matter; for when he has succeeded in being Caesar's
friend, nevertheless he has failed in finding what he sought. For what is that
which every man seeks? To live secure, to be happy, to do everything as he
wishes, not to be hindered, nor compelled. When then he is become the friend of
Caesar, is he free from hindrance? free from compulsion, is he tranquil, is he
happy? Of whom shall we inquire? What more trustworthy witness have we than
this very man who is, become Caesar's friend? Come forward and tell us when did
you sleep more quietly, now or before you became Caesar's friend? Immediately
you hear the answer, "Stop, I entreat you, and do not mock me: you know not
what miseries I suffer, and sleep does not come to me; but one comes and says,
'Caesar is already awake, he is now going forth': then come troubles and
cares." Well, when did you sup with more pleasure, now or before? Hear what he
says about this also. He says that if he is not invited, he is pained: and if
he is invited, he sups like a slave with his master, all the while being
anxious that he does not say or do anything foolish. And what do you suppose
that he is afraid of; lest he should be lashed like a slave? How can he expect
anything so good? No, but as befits so great a man, Caesar's friend, he is
afraid that he may lose his head. And when did you bathe more free from
trouble, and take your gymnastic exercise more quietly? In fine, which kind of
life did you prefer? your present or your former life? I can swear that no man
is so stupid or so ignorant of truth as not to bewail his own misfortunes the
nearer he is in friendship to Caesar.
    Since, then, neither those who are called kings live as they choose, nor
the friends of kings, who finally are those who are free? Seek, and you will
find; for you have aids from nature for the discovery of truth. But if you are
not able yourself by going along these ways only to discover that which
follows, listen to those who have made the inquiry. What do they say? Does
freedom seem to you a good thing? "The greatest good." Is it possible, then,
that he who obtains the greatest good can be unhappy or fare badly? "No."
Whomsoever, then, you shall see unhappy, unfortunate, lamenting, confidently
declare that they are not free. "I do declare it." We have now, then, got away
from buying and selling and from such arrangements about matters of property;
for if you have rightly assented to these matters, if the Great King is
unhappy, he cannot be free, nor can a little king, nor a man of consular rank,
nor one who has been twice consul. "Be it so."
    Further, then, answer me this question also: Does freedom seem to you to be
something great and noble and valuable? "How should it not seem so?" Is it
possible, then, when a man obtains anything, so great and valuable and noble to
be mean? "It is not possible." When, then, you see any man subject to another,
or flattering him contrary to his own opinion, confidently affirm that this man
also is not free; and not only if he do this for a bit of supper, but also if
he does it for a government or a consulship: and call these men "little slaves"
who for the sake of little matters do these things, and those who do so for the
sake of great things call "great slaves," as they deserve to be. "This is
admitted also." Do you think that freedom is a thing independent and
self-governing? "Certainly." Whomsoever, then, it is in the power of another to
hinder and compel, declare that he is not free. And do not look, I entreat you,
after his grandfathers and great-grandfathers, or inquire about his being
bought or sold; but if you hear him saying from his heart and with feeling,
"Master," even if the twelve fasces precede him, call him a slave. And if you
hear him say, "Wretch that I am, how much I suffer," call him a slave. If,
finally, you see him lamenting, complaining, unhappy, call him a slave though
he wears a praetexta. If, then, he is doing nothing of this kind, do not yet
say that he is free, but learn his opinions, whether they are subject to
compulsion, or may produce hindrance, or to bad fortune; and if you find him
such, call him a slave who has a holiday in the Saturnalia: say that his master
is from home: he will return soon, and you will know what he suffers. "Who will
return?" Whoever has in himself the power over anything which is desired by the
man, either to give it to him or to take it away? "Thus, then, have we many
masters?" We have: for we have circumstances as masters prior to our present
masters; and these circumstances are many. Therefore it must of necessity be
that those who have the power over any of these circumstances must be our
masters. For no man fears Caesar himself, but he fears death, banishment,
deprivation of his property, prison, and disgrace. Nor does any man love
Caesar, unless Caesar is a person of great merit, but he loves wealth, the
office of tribune, praetor or consul. When we love, and hate, and fear these
things, it must be that those who have the power over them must be our masters.
Therefore we adore them even as gods; for we think that what possesses the
power of conferring the greatest advantage on us is divine. Then we wrongly
assume that a certain person has the power of conferring the greatest
advantages; therefore he is something divine. For if we wrongly assume that a
certain person has the power of conferring the greatest advantages, it is a
necessary consequence that the conclusion from these premises must be false.
    What, then, is that which makes a man free from hindrance and makes him his
own master? For wealth does not do it, nor consulship, nor provincial
government, nor royal power; but something else must be discovered. What then
is that which, when we write, makes us free from hindrance and unimpeded? "The
knowledge of the art of writing." What, then, is it in playing the lute? "The
science of playing the lute." Therefore in life also it is the science of life.
You have, then, heard in a general way: but examine the thing also in the
several parts. Is it possible that he who desires any of the things which
depend on others can be free from hindrance? "No." Is it possible for him to be
unimpeded? "No." Therefore he cannot be free. Consider then: whether we have
nothing which is in our own power only, or whether we have all things, or
whether some things are in our own power, and others in the power of others.
"What do you mean?" When you wish the body to be entire, is it in your power or
not? "It is not in my power." When you wish it to be healthy? "Neither is this
in my power." When you wish it to be handsome? "Nor is this." Life or death?
"Neither is this in my power." Your body, then, is another's, subject to every
man who is stronger than yourself? "It is." But your estate, is it in your
power to have it when you please, and as long as you please, and such as you
please? "No." And your slaves? "No." And your clothes? "No." And your house?
"No." And your horses? "Not one of these things." And if you wish by all means
your children to live, or your wife, or your brother, or your friends, is it in
your power? "This also is not in my power."
    Whether, then, have you nothing which is in your own power, which depends
on yourself only and cannot be taken from you, or have you anything of the
kind? "I know not." Look at the thing, then, thus, examine it. Is any man able
to make you assent to that which is false? "No man." In the matter of assent,
then, you are free from hindrance and obstruction. "Granted." Well; and can a
man force you to desire to move toward that to which you do not choose? "He
can, for when he threatens me with death or bonds, he compels me to desire to
move toward it." If, then, you despise death and bonds, do you still pay any
regard to him? "No." Is, then, the despising of death an act of your own, or is
it not yours? "It is my act." It is your own act, then, also to desire to move
toward a thing: or is it not so? "It is my own act." But to desire to move away
from a thing, whose act is that? This also is your act. "What, then, if I have
attempted to walk, suppose another should hinder me." What part of you does he
hinder? does he hinder the faculty of assent? "No: but my poor body." Yes, as
he would do with a stone. "Granted; but I no longer walk." And who told you
that walking is your act free from hindrance? for I said that this only was
free from hindrance, to desire to move: but where there is need of body and its
co-operation, you have heard long ago that nothing is your own. "Granted also."
And who can compel you to desire what you do not wish? "No man." And to
propose, or intend, or in short to make use of the appearances which present
themselves, can any man compel you? "He cannot do this: but he will hinder me
when I desire from obtaining what I desire." If you desire anything which is
your own, and one of the things which cannot be hindered, how will he hinder
you? "He cannot in any way." Who, then, tells you that he who desires the
things that belong to another is free from hindrance?
    "Must I, then, not desire health?" By no means, nor anything else that
belongs to another: for what is not in your power to acquire or to keep when
you please, this belongs to another. Keep, then, far from it not only your
hands but, more than that, even your desires. If you do not, you have
surrendered yourself as a slave; you have subjected your neck, if you admire
anything not your own, to everything that is dependent on the power of others
and perishable, to which you have conceived a liking. "Is not my hand my own?"
It is a part of your own body; but it is by nature earth, subject to hindrance,
compulsion, and the slave of everything which is stronger. And why do I say
your hand? You ought to possess your whole body as a poor ass loaded, as long
as it is possible, as long as you are allowed. But if there be a press, and a
soldier should lay hold of it, let it go, do not resist, nor murmur; if you do,
you will receive blows, and nevertheless you will also lose the ass. But when
you ought to feel thus with respect to the body, consider what remains to be
done about all the rest, which is provided for the sake of the body. When the
body is an ass, all the other things are bits belonging to the ass,
pack-saddles, shoes, barley, fodder. Let these also go: get rid of them quicker
and more readily than of the ass.
    When you have made this preparation, and have practiced this discipline, to
distinguish that which belongs to another from that which is your own, the
things which are subject to hindrance from those which are not, to consider the
things free from hindrance to concern yourself, and those which are not free
not to concern yourself, to keep your desire steadily fixed to the things which
do concern yourself, and turned from the things which do not concern yourself;
do you still fear any man? "No one." For about what will you be afraid? about
the things which are your own, in which consists the nature of good and evil?
and who has power over these things? who can take them away? who can impede
them? No man can, no more than he can impede God. But will you be afraid about
your body and your possessions, about things which are not yours, about things
which in no way concern you? and what else have you been studying from the
beginning than to distinguish between your own and not your own, the things
which are in your power and not in your power, the things subject to hindrance
and not subject? and why have you come to the philosophers? was it that you may
nevertheless be unfortunate and unhappy? You will then in this way, as I have
supposed you to have done, be without fear and disturbance. And what is grief
to you? for fear comes from what you expect, but grief from that which is
present. But what further will you desire? For of the things which are within
the power of the will, as being good and present, you have a proper and
regulated desire: but of the things which are not in the power of the will you
do not desire any one, and so you do not allow any place to that which is
irrational, and impatient, and above measure hasty.
    When, then, you are thus affected toward things, what man can any longer be
formidable to you? For what has a man which is formidable to another, either
when you see him or speak to him or, finally, are conversant with him? Not more
than one horse has with respect to another, or one dog to another, or one bee
to another bee. Things, indeed, are formidable to every man; and when any man
is able to confer these things on another or to take them away, then he too
becomes formidable. How then is an acropolis demolished? Not by the sword, not
by fire, but by opinion. For if we abolish the acropolis which is in the city,
can we abolish also that of fever, and that of beautiful women? Can we, in a
word, abolish the acropolis which is in us and cast out the tyrants within us,
whom we have dally over us, sometimes the same tyrants, at other times
different tyrants? But with this we must begin, and with this we must demolish
the acropolis and eject the tyrants, by giving up the body, the parts of it,
the faculties of it, the possessions, the reputation, magisterial offices,
honours, children, brothers, friends, by considering all these things as
belonging to others. And if tyrants have been ejected from us, why do I still
shut in the acropolis by a wall of circumvallation, at least on my account; for
if it still stands, what does it do to me? why do I still eject guards? For
where do I perceive them? against others they have their fasces, and their
spears, and their swords. But I have never been hindered in my will, nor
compelled when I did not will. And how is this possible? I have placed my
movements toward action in obedience to God. Is it His will that I shall have
fever? It is my will also. Is it His will that I should move toward anything?
It is my will also. Is it His will that I should obtain anything? It is my wish
also. Does He not will? I do not wish. Is it His will that I be put to the
rack? It is my will then to die; it is my will then to be put to the rack. Who,
then, is still able to hinder me contrary to my own judgement, or to compel me?
No more than he can hinder or compel Zeus.
    Thus the more cautious of travelers also act. A traveler has heard that the
road is infested by robbers; he does not venture to enter on it alone, but he
waits for the companionship on the road either of an ambassador, or of a
quaestor, or of a proconsul, and when he has attached himself to such persons
he goes along the road safely. So in the world the wise man acts. There are
many companies of robbers, tyrants, storms, difficulties, losses of that which
is dearest. "Where is there any place of refuge? how shall he pass along
without being attacked by robbers? what company shall he wait for that he may
pass along in safety? to whom shall he attach himself? To what person
generally? to the rich man, to the man of consular rank? and what is the use of
that to me? Such a man is stripped himself, groans and laments. But what if the
fellow-companion himself turns against me and becomes my robber, what shall I
do? I will be 'a friend of Caesar': when I am Caesar's companion no man will
wrong me. In the first place, that I may become illustrious, what things must I
endure and suffer? how often and by how many must I he robbed? Then, if I
become Caesar's friend, he also is mortal. And if Caesar from any circumstance
becomes my enemy, where is it best for me to retire? Into a desert? Well, does
fever not come there? What shall be done then? Is it not possible to find a
safe fellow traveler, a faithful one, strong, secure against all surprises?"
Thus he considers and perceives that if he attaches himself to God, he will
make his journey in safety.
    "How do you understand 'attaching yourself to God'?" In this sense, that
whatever God wills, a man also shall will; and what God does not will, a man
shall not will. How, then, shall this he done? In what other way than by
examining the movements of God and his administration What has He given to me
as my own and in my own power? what has He reserved to Himself? He has given to
me the things which are in the power of the will: He has put them in my power
free from impediment and hindrance. How was He able to make the earthly body
free from hindrance? And accordingly He has subjected to the revolution of the
whole, possessions, household things, house, children, wife. Why, then, do I
fight against God? why do I will what does not depend on the will? why do I
will to have absolutely what is not granted to ma? But how ought I to will to
have things? In the way in which they are given and as long as they are given.
But He who has given takes away. Why then do I resist? I do not say that I
shall be fool if I use force to one who is stronger, but I shall first be
unjust. For whence had I things when I came into the world? My father gave them
to me. And who gave them to him? and who made the sun? and who made the fruits
of the earth? and who the seasons? and who made the connection of men with one
another and their fellowship?
    Then after receiving everything from another and even yourself, are you
angry and do you blame the Giver if he takes anything from you? Who are you,
and for what purpose did you come into the world? Did not He introduce you
here, did He not show you the light, did he not give you fellow-workers, and
perception, and reason? and as whom did He introduce you here? did He not
introduce you as a subject to death, and as one to live on the earth with a
little flesh, and to observe His administration, and to join with Him in the
spectacle and the festival for a short time? Will you not, then, as long as you
have been permitted, after seeing the spectacle and the solemnity, when he
leads you out, go with adoration of Him and thanks for what you have seen, and
heard? "No; but I would, still enjoy the feast." The initiated, too, would wish
to be longer in the initiation: and perhaps also those, at Olympia to see other
athletes; but the solemnity is ended: go away like a grateful and modest man;
make room for others: others also must be born, as you were, and being born
they must have a place, and houses and necessary things. And if the first do
not retire, what remains? Why ire you insatiable? Why are you not content? why
do you contract the world? "Yes, but I would have my little children with me
and my wife." What, are they yours? do they not belong to the Giver, and to Him
who made you? then will you not give up what belongs to others? will you not
give way to Him who is superior? "Why, then, did He introduce me into the world
on these conditions," And if the conditions do not suit you depart. He has no
need of a spectator who is not satisfied. He wants those who join in the
festival, those who take part in the chorus, that they may rather applaud,
admire, and celebrate with hymns the solemnity. But those who can bear no
trouble, and the cowardly He will not willingly see absent from the great
assembly; for they did not when they were present behave as they ought to do at
a festival nor fill up their place properly, but they lamented, found fault
with the deity, fortune, their companions; not seeing both what they had. and
their own powers, which they received for contrary purposes, the powers of
magnanimity, of a generous mind, manly spirit, and what we are now inquiring
about, freedom. "For what purpose, then, have I received these things? To use
them. "How long;" So long as He who his lent them chooses. "What if they are
necessary to me?" Do not attach yourself to them and they will not be
necessary: do not say to yourself that they are necessary, and then they are
not necessary.
    This study you ought to practice from morning to evening, beginning, with
the smallest things and those most liable to damage, with an earthen pot, with
a cup. Then proceed in this way to a tunic to a little dog, to a horse, to a
small estate in land: then to yourself, to your body, to the parts of your
body, to your brothers. Look all round and throw these things from you. Purge
your opinions so that nothing cleave to you of the things which are not your
own, that nothing grow to you, that nothing give you pain when it is torn from
you; and say, while you are daily exercising yourself as you do there, not that
you are philosophizing, for this is an arrogant expression, but that you are
presenting an asserter of freedom: for this is really freedom. To this freedom
Diogenes was called by Antisthenes, and he said that he could no longer be
enslaved by any man. For this reason when he was taken prisoner, how did he
behave to the pirates? Did he call any of them master? and I do not speak of
the name, for I am not afraid of the word, but of the state of mind by which
the word is produced. How did he reprove them for feeding badly their captives?
How was he sold? Did he seek a master? no; but a slave, And, when he was sold,
how did he behave to his master? Immediately he disputed with him and said to
his master that he ought not to be dressed as he was, nor shaved in such a
manner; and about the children he told them how he ought to bring them up. And
what was strange in this? for if his master had bought an exercise master,
would he have employed him in the exercises of the palaestra as a servant or as
a master? and so if he had bought a physician or an architect. And so, in every
matter, it is absolutely necessary that he who has skill must be the superior
of him who has not. Whoever, then, generally possesses the science of life,
what else must he be than master? For who is master of a ship? "The man who
governs the helm." Why? Because he who will not obey him suffers for it. "But a
master can give me stripes." Can he do it, then, without suffering for it?' "So
I also used to think." But because he can not do it without suffering for it,
for this reason it is not in his power: and no man can do what is unjust
without suffering for it. "And what is the penalty for him who puts his own
slave in chains, what do you think that is?" The fact of putting the slave in
chains: and you also will admit this, if you choose to maintain the truth, that
man is not a wild beast, but a tame animal. For when is a a vine doing badly?
When it is in a condition contrary to its nature. When is a cock? Just the
same. Therefore a man also is so. What then is a man's nature? To bite, to
kick, and to throw into prison and to behead? No; but to do good, to co-operate
with others, to wish them well. At that time, then, he is in a bad condition,
whether you choose to admit it or not, when he is acting foolishly.
    "Socrates, then, did not fare badly?" No; but his judges aid his accusers
did. "Nor did Helvidius at Rome fare badly?" No; but his murderer did. "How do
you mean?" The same as you do when you say that a cock has not fared badly when
he has gained the victory and been severely wounded; but that the cock has
fared badly when he has been defeated and is unhurt: nor do you call a dog
fortunate who neither pursues game nor labors, but when you see him sweating,
when you see him in pain and panting violently after running. What paradox do
we utter if we say that the evil in everything's that which is contrary to the
nature of the thing? Is that a paradox? for do you not say this in the case of
all other things? Why then in the case of man only do you think differently,
But because we say that the nature of man is tame and social and faithful, you
will not say that this is a paradox? "It is not." What then is it a paradox to
say that a man is not hurt when he is whipped, or put in chains, or beheaded?
does he not, if he suffers nobly, come off even with increased advantage and
profit? But is he not hurt, who suffers in a most pitiful and disgraceful way,
who in place of a man becomes a wolf, or viper or wasp?
    Well then let us recapitulate the things which have been agreed on. The man
who is not under restraint is free, to whom things are exactly in that state in
which he wishes them to be; but he who can be restrained or compelled or
hindered, or thrown into any circumstances against his will, is a slave. But
who is free from restraint? He who desires nothing that belongs to others. And
what are the things which belong to others? Those which are not in our power
either to have or not to have, or to have of a certain kind or in a certain
manner. Therefore the body belongs to another, the parts of the body belong to
another, possession belongs to another. If, then, you are attached to any of
these things as your own, you will pay the penalty which it is proper for him
to pay who desires what belongs to another. This road leads to freedom, that is
the only way of escaping from slavery, to be able to say at last with all your
soul
       Lead me, O Zeus, and thou O destiny,
       The way that I am bid by you to go.
But what do you say, philosopher? The tyrant summons you to say something which
does not become you. Do you say it or do you not? Answer me. "Let me consider."
Will you consider now? But when you were in the school, what was it which you
used to consider? Did you not study what are the things that are good and what
are bad, and what things are neither one nor the other? "I did." What then was
our opinion? "That just and honourable acts were good; and that unjust and
disgraceful acts were bad." Is life a good thing? "No." Is death a bad thing?
"No." Is prison? "No." But what did we think about mean and faithless words and
betrayal of a friend and flattery of a tyrant? "That they are bad." Well then,
you are not considering, nor have you considered nor deliberated. For what is
the matter for consideration: is it whether it is becoming for me, when I have
it in my power, to secure for myself the greatest of good things, and not to
secure for myself the greatest evils? A fine inquiry indeed, and necessary, and
one that demands much deliberation. Man, why do you mock us? Such an inquiry is
never made. If you really imagined that base things were bad and honourable
things were good, and that all other things were neither good nor bad, you
would not even have approached this inquiry, nor have come near it; but
immediately you would have been able to distinguish them by the understanding
as you would do by the vision. For when do you inquire if black things are
white, if heavy things are light, and do not comprehend the manifest evidence
of the senses? How, then, do you now say that you are considering whether
things which are neither good nor bad ought to be avoided more than things
which are bad? But you do not possess these opinions; and neither do these
things seem to you to he neither good nor bad, but you think that they are the
greatest evils; nor do you think those other things to be evils, but matters
which do not concern us at all. For thus from the beginning you have accustomed
yourself. "Where am I? In the schools: and are any listening to me? I am
discoursing among philosophers. But I have gone out of the school. Away with
this talk of scholars and fools." Thus a friend is overpowered by the testimony
of a philosopher: thus a philosopher becomes a parasite; thus he lets himself
for hire for money: thus in the senate a man does not say what he thinks; in
private he proclaims his opinions. You are a cold and miserable little opinion,
suspended from idle words as from a hair. But keep yourself strong and fit for
the uses of life and initiated by being exercised in action. How do you hear? I
do not say that your child is dead- for how could you bear that?- but that your
oil is spilled, your wine drunk up. Do you act in such a way that one standing
by you while you are making a great noise, may say this only, "Philosopher, you
say something different in the school. Why do you deceive us? Why, when you are
only a worm, do you say that you are a man?" I should like to be present when
one of the philosophers is lying with a woman, that I might see how he is
exerting himself, and what words he is uttering, and whether he remembers his
title of philosopher, and the words which he hears or says or reads.
    "And what is this to liberty?" Nothing else than this, whether you who are
rich choose or not. "And who is your evidence for this?" who else than
yourselves? who have a powerful master, and who live in obedience to his nod
and motion, and who faint if he only looks at you with a scowling countenance;
you who court old women and old men, and say, "I cannot do this: it is not in
my power." Why is it not in your power? Did you not lately contend with me and
say that you are free "But Aprulla has hindered me." Tell the truth, then,
slave, and do not run away from your masters, nor deny, nor venture to produce
any one to assert your freedom, when you have so many evidences of your
slavery. And indeed when a man is compelled by love to do something contrary to
his opinion, and at the same time sees the better but has not the strength to
follow it, one might consider him still more worthy of excuse as being held by
a certain violent and, in a manner, a divine power. But who could endure you
who are in love with old women and old men, and wipe the old women's noses, and
wash them and give them presents, and also wait on them like a slave when they
are sick, and at the same time wish them dead, and question the physicians
whether they are sick unto death? And again, when in order to obtain these
great and much admired magistracies and honours, you kiss the hands of these
slaves of others, and so you are not the slave even of free men. Then you walk
about before me in stately fashion, praetor or a consul. Do I not know how you
became a praetor, by what means you got your consulship, who gave it to you? I
would not even choose to live, if I must live by help of Felicion and endure
his arrogance and servile insolence: for I know what a slave is, who is
fortunate, as he thinks, and puffed up by pride.
    "You then," a man may say, "are you free?" I wish, by the Gods, and pray to
be free; but I am not yet able to face my masters, I still value my poor body,
I value greatly the preservation of it entire, though I do not possess it
entire. But I can point out to you a free man, that you may no longer seek an
example. Diogenes was free. How was he free?- not because he was born of free
parents, but because he was himself free, because he had cast off all the
handles of slavery, and it was not possible for any man to approach him, nor
had any man the means of laying hold of him to enslave him. He had everything
easily loosed, everything only hanging to him. If you laid hold of his
property, he would rather have let it go and be yours than he would have
followed you for it: if you had laid hold of his leg, he would have let go his
leg; if of all his body, all his poor body; his intimates, friends, country,
just the same. For he knew from whence he had them, and from whom, and on what
conditions. His true parents indeed, the Gods, and his real country he would
never have deserted, nor would he have yielded to any man in obedience to them
or to their orders, nor would any man have died for his country more readily.
For he was not used to inquire when he should be considered to have done
anything on behalf of the whole of things, but he remembered that everything
which is done comes from thence and is done on behalf of that country and is
commanded by him who administers it. Therefore see what Diogenes himself says
and writes: "For this reason," he says, "Diogenes, it is in your power to speak
both with the King of the Persians and with Archidamus the king of the
Lacedaemonians, as you please." Was it because he was born of free parents? I
suppose all the Athenians and all the Lacedaemonians, because they were born of
slaves, could not talk with them as they wished, but feared and paid court to
them. Why then does he say that it is in his power? "Because I do not consider
the poor body to be my own, because I want nothing, because law is everything
to me, and nothing else is." These were the things which permitted him to be
free.
    And that you may not think that I show you the example of a man who is a
solitary person, who has neither wife nor children, nor country, nor friends
nor kinsmen, by whom he could be bent and drawn in various directions, take
Socrates and observe that he had a wife and children, but he did not consider
them as his own; that he had a country, so long as it was fit to have one, and
in such a manner as was fit; friends and kinsmen also, but he held all in
subjection to law and to the obedience due to it. For this reason he was the
first to go out as a soldier, when it was necessary; and in war he exposed
himself to danger most unsparingly, and when he was sent by the tyrants to
seize Leon, he did not even deliberate about the matter, because he thought
that it was a base action, and he knew that he must die, if it so happened. And
what difference did that make to him? for he intended to preserve something
else, not his poor flesh, but his fidelity, his honourable character. These are
things which could not be assailed nor brought into subjection. Then, when he
was obliged to speak in defense of his life, did he behave like a man who had
children, who had a wife? No, but he behaved like a man who has neither. And
what did he do when he was to drink the poison, and when he had the power of
escaping from prison, and when Crito said to him, "Escape for the sake of your
children," what did Socrates say? Did he consider the power of escape as an
unexpected gain? By no means: he considered what was fit and proper; but the
rest he did not even look at or take into the reckoning. For he did not choose,
he said, to save his poor body, but to save that which is increased and saved
by doing what is just, and is impaired and destroyed by doing what is unjust.
Socrates will not save his life by a base act; he who would not put the
Athenians to the vote when they clamoured that he should do so, he who refused
to obey the tyrants, he who discoursed in such a manner about virtue and right
behavior. It is not possible to save such a man's life by base acts, but he is
saved by dying, not by running away. For the good actor also preserves his
character by stopping when he ought to stop, better than when he goes on acting
beyond the proper time. What then shall the children of Socrates do? "If," said
Socrates, "I had gone off to Thessaly, would you have taken care of them; and
if I depart to the world below, will there be no man to take care of them?" See
how he gives to death a gentle name and mocks it. But if you and I had been in
his place, we should have immediately answered as philosophers that those who
act unjustly must be repaid in the same way, and we should have added, "I shall
be useful to many, if my life is saved, and if I die, I shall be useful to no
man." For, if it had been necessary, we should have made our escape by slipping
through a small hole. And how in that case should we have been useful to any
man? for where would they have been then staying? or if we were useful to men
while we were alive, should we not have been much more useful to them by dying
when we ought to die, and as we ought? And now, Socrates being dead, no less
useful to men, and even more useful, is the remembrance of that which he did or
said when he was alive.
    Think of these things, these opinions, these words: look to these examples,
if you would be free, if you desire the thing according to its worth. And what
is the wonder if you buy so great a thing at the price of things so many and so
great? For the sake of this which is called "liberty," some hang themselves,
others throw themselves down precipices, and sometimes even whole cities have
perished: and will you not for the sake of the true and unassailable and secure
liberty give back to God when He demands them the things which He has given?
Will you not, as Plato says, study not to die only, but also to endure torture,
and exile, and scourging, and, in a word, to give up all which is not your own?
If you will not, you will be a slave among slaves, even you be ten thousand
times a consul; and if you make your way up to the Palace, you will no less be
a slave; and you will feel, that perhaps philosophers utter words which are
contrary to common opinion, as Cleanthes also said, but not words contrary to
reason. For you will know by experience that the words are true, and that there
is no profit from the things which are valued and eagerly sought to those who
have obtained them; and to those who have not yet obtained them there is an
imagination that when these things are come, all that is good will come with
them; then, when they are come, the feverish feeling is the same, the tossing
to and fro is the same, the satiety, the desire of things which are not
present; for freedom is acquired not by the full possession of the things which
are desired, but by removing the desire. And that you may know that this is
true, as you have laboured for those things, so transfer your labour to these;
be vigilant for the purpose of acquiring an opinion which will make you free;
pay court to a philosopher instead of to a rich old man: be seen about a
philosopher's doors: you will not disgrace yourself by being seen; you will not
go away empty nor without profit, if you go to the philosopher as you ought,
and if not, try at least: the trial is not disgraceful.



On familiar intimacy

    To This matter before all you must attend: that you be never so closely
connected with any of your former intimates or friends as to come down to the
same acts as he does. If you do not observe this rule, you will ruin yourself.
But if the thought arises in your mind. "I shall seem disobliging to him, and
he will not have the same feeling toward me," remember that nothing is done
without cost, nor is it possible for a man if he does not do the same to be the
same man that he was. Choose, then, which of the two you will have, to be
equally loved by those by whom you were formerly loved, being the same with
your former self; or, being superior, not to obtain from your friends the same
that you did before. For if this is better, turn away to it, and let not other
considerations draw you in a different direction. For no man is able to make
progress, when he is wavering between opposite things, but if you have
preferred this to all things, if you choose to attend to this only, to work out
this only, give up everything else. But if you will not do this, your wavering
will produce both these results: you will neither improve as you ought, nor
will you obtain what you formerly obtained. For before, by plainly desiring the
things which were worth nothing, you pleased your associates. But you cannot
excel in both kinds, and it is necessary that so far as you share in the one,
you must fall short in the other. You cannot, when you do not drink with those
with whom you used to drink, he agreeable to them as you were before. Choose,
then, whether you will be a hard drinker and pleasant to your former associates
or a sober man and disagreeable to them. You cannot, when you do not sing with
those with whom you used to sing, be equally loved by them. Choose, then, in
this matter also which of the two you will have. For if it is better to be
modest and orderly than for a man to say, "He is a jolly fellow," give up the
rest, renounce it, turn away from it, have nothing to do with such men. But if
this behavior shall not please you, turn altogether to the opposite: become a
catamite, an adulterer, and act accordingly, and you will get what you wish.
And jump up in the theatre and bawl out in praise of the dancer. But characters
so different cannot be mingled: you cannot act both Thersites and Agamemnon. If
you intend to be Thersites, you must be humpbacked and bald: if Agamemnon, you
must be tall and handsome, and love those who are placed in obedience to you.



What things we should exchange for other things

    Keep this thought in readiness, when you lose anything external, what you
acquire in place of it; and if it be worth more, never say, "I have had a
loss"; neither if you have got a horse in place of an ass, or an ox in place of
a sheep, nor a good action in place of a bit of money, nor in place of idle
talk such tranquillity as befits a man, nor in place of lewd talk if you have
acquired modesty. If you remember this, you will always maintain your character
such as it ought to be. But if you do not, consider that the times of
opportunity are perishing, and that whatever pains you take about yourself, you
are going to waste them all and overturn them. And it needs only a few things
for the loss and overturning of all, namely a small deviation from reason. For
the steerer of a ship to upset it, he has no need of the same means as he has
need of for saving it: but if he turns it a little to the wind, it is lost; and
if he does not do this purposely, but has been neglecting his duty a little,
the ship is lost. Something of the kind happens in this case also: if you only
fall to nodding a little, all that you have up to this time collected is gone.
Attend therefore to the appearances of things, and watch over them; for that
which you have to preserve is no small matter, but it is modesty and fidelity
and constancy, freedom from the affects, a state of mind undisturbed, freedom
from fear, tranquillity, in a word, "liberty." For what will you sell these
things? See what is the value of the things which you will obtain in exchange
for these. "But shall I not obtain any such thing for it?" See, and if you do
in return get that, see what you receive in place of it. "I possess decency, he
possesses a tribuneship: be possesses a praetorship, I possess modesty. But I
do not make acclamations where it is not becoming: I will not stand up where I
ought not; for I am free, and a friend of God, and so I obey Him willingly. But
I must not claim anything else, neither body nor possession, nor magistracy,
nor good report, nor in fact anything. For He does not allow me to claim them:
for if He had chosen, He would have made them good for me; but He has not done
so, and for this reason I cannot transgress his commands." Preserve that which
is your own good in everything; and as to every other thing, as it is
permitted, and so far as to behave consistently with reason in respect to them,
content with this only. If you do not, you will be unfortunate, you will fall
in all things, you will be hindered, you will be impeded. These are the laws
which have been sent from thence; these are the orders. Of these laws a man
ought to be an expositor, to these he ought to submit, not to those of Masurius
and Cassius.


To those who are desirous of passing life in tranquility

    Remember that not only the desire of power and of riches makes us mean and
subject to others, but even the desire of tranquillity, and of leisure. and of
traveling abroad, and of learning. For, to speak plainly, whatever the external
thing may be, the value which we set upon it places us in subjection to others.
What, then, is the difference between desiring, to be a senator or not desiring
to be one; what is the difference between desiring power or being content with
a private station; what is the difference between saying, "I am unhappy, I have
nothing, to do, but I am bound to my books as a corpse"; or saying, "I am
unhappy, I have no leisure for reading"? For as salutations and power are
things external and independent of the will, so is a book. For what purpose do
you choose to read? Tell me. For if you only direct your purpose to being
amused or learning something, you are a silly fellow and incapable of enduring
labour. But if you refer reading to the proper end, what else is this than a
tranquil and happy life? But if reading does not secure for you a happy and
tranquil life, what is the use of it? But it does secure this," the man
replies, "and for this reason I am vexed that I am deprived of it." And what is
this tranquil and happy life, which any man can impede; I do not say Caesar or
Caesar's friend, but a crow, a piper, a fever, and thirty thousand other
things? But a tranquil and happy life contains nothing so sure is continuity
and freedom from obstacle. Now I am called to do something: I will go, then,
with the purpose of observing the measures which I must keep, of acting with
modesty, steadiness, without desire and aversion to things external; and then
that I may attend to men, what they say, how they are moved; and this not with
any bad disposition, or that I may have something to blame or to ridicule; but
I turn to myself, and ask if I also commit the same faults. "How then shall I
cease to commit them?" Formerly I also acted wrong, but now I do not: thanks to
God.
    Come, when you have done these things and have attended to them, have you
done a worse act than when you have read a thousand verses or written as many?
For when you eat, are you grieved because you are not reading? are you not
satisfied with eating according to what you have learned by reading, and so
with bathing and with exercise? Why, then, do you not act consistently in all
things, both when you approach Caesar and when you approach any person? If you
maintain yourself free from perturbation, free from alarm, and steady; if you
look rather at the things which are done and happen than are looked at
yourself; if you do not envy those who are preferred before you; if surrounding
circumstances do not strike you with fear or admiration, what do you want?
Books? How or for what purpose? for is not this a preparation for life? and is
not life itself made up of certain other things than this? This is just as if
an athlete should weep when he enters the stadium, because he is not being
exercised outside of it. It was for this purpose that you used to practice
exercise; for this purpose were used the halteres, the dust, the young men as
antagonists; and do you seek for those things now when it is the time of
action? This is just as if in the topic of assent when appearances present
themselves, some of which can he comprehended, and some cannot be comprehended,
we should not choose to distinguish them but should choose to read what has
been written about comprehension.
    What then is the reason of this? The reason is that we have never read for
this purpose, we have never written for this purpose, so that we may in our
actions use in a way conformable to nature the appearances presented to us; but
we terminate in this, in learning what is said, and in being able to expound it
to another, in resolving a syllogism, and in handling the hypothetical
syllogism. For this reason where our study is, there alone is the impediment.
Would you have by all means the things which are not in your power? Be
prevented then, be hindered, fail in your purpose. But if we read what is
written about action, not that we may see what is said about action, but that
we may act well: if we read what is said about desire and aversion, in order
that we may neither fall in our desires, nor fall into that which we try to
avoid: if we read what is said about duty, in order that, remembering the
relations, we may do nothing irrationally nor contrary to these relations; we
should not be vexed in being hindered as to our readings, but we should be
satisfied with doing, the acts which are conformable, and we should be
reckoning not what so far we have been accustomed to reckon; "To-day I have
read so many verses, I have written so many"; but, "To-day I have employed my
action as it is taught by the philosophers; I have not employed any desire; I
have used avoidance only with respect to things which are within the power of
my will; I have not been afraid of such a person, I have not been prevailed
upon by the entreaties of another; I have exercised my patience, my abstinence
my co-operation with others"; and so we should thank God for what we ought to
thank Him.
    But now we do not know that we also in another way are like the many.
Another man is afraid that he shall not have power: you are afraid that you
will. Do not do so, my man; but as you ridicule him who is afraid that he,
shall not have power, so ridicule yourself also. For it makes no difference
whether you are thirsty like a man who has a fever, or have a dread of water
like a man who is mad. Or how will you still be able to say as Socrates did,
"If so it pleases God, so let it be"? Do you think that Socrates, if he had
been eager to pass his leisure in the Lyceum or in the Academy and to discourse
dally with the young men, would have readily served in military expeditions so
often as he did; and would he not have lamented and groaned, "Wretch that I am;
I must now be miserable here, when I might be sunning myself in the Lyceum"?
Why, was this your business, to sun yourself? And is it not your business to be
happy, to be free from hindrance, free from impediment? And could he still have
been Socrates, if he had lamented in this way: how would he still have been
able to write Paeans in his prison?
    In short, remember this, that what you shall prize which is beyond your
will, so far you have destroyed your will. But these things are out of the
power of the will, not only power, but also a private condition: not only
occupation, but also leisure. "Now, then, must I live in this tumult?" Why do
you say "tumult"? "I mean among many men." Well what is the hardship? Suppose
that you are at Olympia: imagine it to be a panegyris, where one is calling out
one thing, another is doing another thing, and a third is pushing another
person: in the baths there is a crowd: and who of us is not pleased with this
assembly and leaves it unwillingly, Be not difficult to please nor fastidious
about what happens. "Vinegar is disagreeable, for it is sharp; honey is
disagreeable, for it disturbs my habit of body. I do not like vegetables." So
also, "I do not like leisure; it is a desert: I do not like a crowd; it is
confusion." But if circumstances make it necessary for you to live alone or
with a few, call it quiet and use the thing as you ought: talk with yourself,
exercise the appearances, work up your preconceptions. If you fall into a
crowd, call it a celebration of games, a panegyris, a festival: try to enjoy
the festival with other men. For what is a more pleasant sight to him who loves
mankind than a number of men? We see with pleasure herds of horses or oxen: we
are delighted when we see many ships: who is pained when he sees many men? "But
they deafen me with their cries." Then your hearing is impeded. What, then, is
this to you? Is, then, the power of making use of appearances hindered? And who
prevents you from using, according to nature, inclination to a thing and
aversion from it; and movement toward a thing and movement from it? What tumult
is able to do this?
    Do you only bear in mind the general rules: "What is mine, what is not
mine; what is given to me; what does God will that I should do now? what does
He not will?" A little before he willed you to be at leisure, to talk with
yourself, to write about these things, to read, to hear, to prepare yourself.
You had sufficient time for this. Now He says to you: "Come now to the contest;
show us what you have learned, how you have practiced the athletic art. How
long will you be exercised alone? Now is the opportunity for you to learn
whether you are an athlete worthy of victory, or one of those who go about the
world and are defeated." Why, then, are; you vexed? No contest is without
confusion. There be many who exercise themselves for the contests, many who
call out to those who exercise themselves, many masters, many spectators. "But
my wish is to live quietly." Lament, then, and groan as you deserve to do. For
what other is a greater punishment than this to the untaught man and to him who
disobeys the divine commands: to be grieved, to lament, to envy, in a word, to
be disappointed and to he unhappy? Would you not release yourself from these
things? "And how shall I release myself?" Have you not often heard that you
ought to remove entirely desire, apply aversion to those things only which are
within your power, that you ought to give up everything, body, property, fame,
books, tumult, power, private station? for whatever way you turn, you are a
slave, you are subjected, you are hindered, you are compelled, you are entirely
in the power of others. But keep the words of Cleanthes in readiness,
       Lead me, O Zeus, and thou necessity.
    Is it your will that I should go to Rome? I will go to Rome. To Gyara? I
will go to Gyara. I will go to Athens? I will go to Athens. To prison? I will
go to prison. If you should once say, "When shall a man go to Athens?" you are
undone. It is a necessary consequence that this desire, if it is not
accomplished, must make you unhappy; and if it is accomplished, it must make
you vain, since you are elated at things at which you ought not to be elated;
and on the other hand, if you are impeded, it must make you wretched because
you fall into that which you would not fall into. Give up then all these
things. "Athens is a good place." But happiness is much better; and to be free
from passions, free from disturbance, for your affairs not to depend on any
man. "There is tumult at Rome and visits of salutation." But happiness is an
equivalent for all troublesome things. If, then, the time comes for these
things, why do you not take away the wish to avoid them? what necessity is
there to carry to avoid a burden like an ass, and to be beaten with a stick?
But if you do not so, consider that you must always be a slave to him who has
it in his power to effect your release, and also to impede you, and you must
serve him as an evil genius.
    There is only one way to happiness, and let this rule be ready both in the
morning and during the day and by night; the rule is not to look toward things
which are out of the power of our will, to think that nothing is our own, to
give up all things to the Divinity, to Fortune; to make them the
superintendents of these things, whom Zeus also has made so; for a man to
observe that only which is his own, that which cannot be hindered; and when we
read, to refer our reading to this only, and our writing and our listening. For
this reason, I cannot call the man industrious, if I hear this only, that he
reads and writes; and even if a man adds that he reads all night, I cannot say
so, if he knows not to what he should refer his reading. For neither do you say
that a man is industrious if he keeps awake for a girl; nor do I. But if he
does it for reputation, I say that he is a lover of reputation. And if he does
it for money, I say that he is a lover of money, not a lover of labour; and if
he does it through love of learning, I say that he is a lover of learning. But
if he refers his labour to his own ruling power, that he may keep it in a state
conformable to nature and pass his life in that state, then only do I say that
he is industrious. For never commend a man on account of these things which are
common to all, but on account of his opinions; for these are the things which
belong to each man, which make his actions bad or good. Remembering these
rules, rejoice in that which is present, and be content with the things which
come in season. If you see anything which you have learned and inquired about
occurring, to you in your course of life, be delighted at it. If you have laid
aside or have lessened bad disposition and a habit of reviling; if you have
done so with rash temper, obscene words, hastiness, sluggishness; if you are
not moved by what you formerly were, and not in the same way as you once were,
you can celebrate a festival daily, to-day because you have behaved well in one
act, and to-morrow because you have behaved well in another. How much greater
is this a reason for making sacrifices than a consulship or the government of a
province? These things come to you from yourself and from the gods. Remember
this, Who gives these things and to whom, and for what purpose. If you cherish
yourself in these thoughts, do you still think that it makes any difference
where yon shall be happy, where you shall please God? Are not the gods equally
distant from all places? Do they not see from all places alike that which is
going on?

Against the quarrelsome and ferocious

    The wise and good man neither himself fights with any person, nor does he
allow another, so far as he can prevent it. And an example of this as well as
of all other things is proposed to us in the life of Socrates, who not only
himself on all occasions avoided fights, but would not allow even others to
quarrel. See in Xenophon's Symposium how many quarrels he settled; how further
he endured Thrasymachus and Polus and Callicles; how he tolerated his wife, and
how he tolerated his son who attempted to confute him aid to cavil with him.
For he remembered well that no man has in his power another man's ruling
principle. He wished, therefore nothing else than that which was his own. And
what is this? Not that this or that man may act according to nature; for that
is a thing which belongs to another; but that while others are doing their own
acts, as they choose, he may never the less be in a condition conformable to
nature and live in it, only doing what is his own to the end that others also
may be in a state conformable to nature. For this is the object always set
before him by the wise and good man. Is it to be commander of an army? No: but
if it is permitted him, his object is in this matter to maintain his own ruling
principle. Is it to marry? No; but if marriage is allowed to him, in this
matter his object is to maintain himself in a condition conformable to nature.
But if he would have his son not to do wrong, or his wife, he would have what
belongs to another not to belong to another; and to he instructed is this: to
learn what things are a man's own and what belongs to another.
    How, then, is there left any place for fighting, to a man who has this
opinion? Is he surprised at anything which happens, and does it appear new to
him? Does he not expect that which comes from the bad to be worse and more
grievous than what actually befalls him? And does he not reckon as pure gain
whatever they may do which falls short of extreme wickedness? "Such a person
has reviled you." Great thanks to him for not having, struck you. "But he has
struck me also." Great thanks that he did not wound you "But he wounded me
also." Great thanks that he did not kill you. For when did he learn or in what
school that man is a tame animal, that men love one another, that an act of
injustice is a great harm to him who does it. Since then he has not to him who
does it. Since then he has not learned this and is not convinced of it, why
shall he not follow that which seems to be for his own "Your neighbour has
thrown stones." Have you then done anything wrong? "But the things in the house
have been broken." Are you then a utensil? No; but a free power of will. What,
then, is given to you in answer to this? If you are like a wolf, you must bite
in return, and throw more stones. But if you consider what is proper for a man,
examine your store-house, see with at faculties you came into the world. Have
you the disposition of a wild beast, Have you the disposition of revenge for an
injury? When is a horse wretched? When he is deprived of his natural faculties;
not when he cannot crow like a cock, but when he cannot run. When is a dog
wretched? Not when he cannot fly, but when he cannot track his game. Is, then,
a man also unhappy in this way, not because he cannot strangle lions or embrace
statues, for he did not come into the world in the possession of certain powers
from nature for this purpose, but because he has lost his probity and his
fidelity? People ought to meet and lament such a man for the misfortunes into
which he has fallen; not indeed to lament because a man his been born or has
died, but because it has happened to him in his lifetime to have lost the
things which are his own, not that which he received from his father, not his
land and house, and his inn, and his slaves; for not one of these things is a
man's own, but all belong to others, are servile and subject to account, at
different times given to different persons by those who have them in their
power: but I mean the things which belong to him as a man, the marks in his
mind with which he came into the world, such as we seek also on coins, and if
we find them, we approve of the coins, and if we do not find the marks, we
reject them. What is the stamp on this Sestertius? "The stamp of Trajan."
Present it. "It is the stamp of Nero." Throw it away: it cannot be accepted, it
is counterfeit. So also in this case. What is the stamp of his opinions? "It is
gentleness, a sociable disposition, a tolerant temper, a disposition to mutual
affection." Produce these qualities. I accept them: I consider this man a
citizen, I accept him as a neighbour, a companion in my voyages. Only see that
he has not Nero's stamp. Is he passionate, is he full of resentment, is he
faultfinding? If the whim seizes him, does he break the heads of those who come
in his way? Why, then did you say that he is a man? Is everything judged by the
bare form? If that is so, say that the form in wax is all apple and has the
smell and the taste of an apple. But the external figure is not enough: neither
then is the nose enough and the eyes to make the man, but he must have the
opinions of a man. Here is a man who does not listen to reason, who does not
know when he is refuted: he is an ass: in another man the sense of shame is
become dead: he is good for nothing, he is anything rather than a man. This man
seeks whom he may meet and kick or bite, so that he is not even a sheep or an
ass, but a kind of wild beast.
    "What then would you have me to be despised?" By whom? by those who know
you? and how and how shall those who know you despise a man who is gentle and
modest? Perhaps you mean by those who do not know you? What is that to you? For
no other artisan cares for the opinion of those who know not his art. "But they
will be more hostile to me for this reason." Why do you say "me"? Can any man
injure your will, or prevent you from using in a natural way the appearances
which are presented to you, "In no way can he." Why, then, are still disturbed
and why do you choose to show yourself afraid? And why do you not come forth
and proclaim that you are at peace with all men whatever they may do, and laugh
at those chiefly who think that they can harm you? "These slaves," you can say,
"know not either who I am nor where lies my good or my evil, because they have
no access to the things which are mine."
    In this way, also, those who occupy a strong city mock the besiegers; "What
trouble these men are now taking for nothing: our wall is secure, we have food
for a very long time, and all other resources." These are the things which make
a city strong and impregnable: but nothing else than his opinions makes a man's
soul impregnable. For what wall is so strong, or what body is so hard, or what
possession is so safe, or what honour so free from assault? All things
everywhere are perishable, easily taken by assault, and, if any man in any way
is attached to them, he must be disturbed, expect what is bad, he must fear,
lament, find his desires disappointed, and fall into things which he would
avoid. Then do we not choose to make secure the only means of safety which are
offered to us, and do we not choose to withdraw ourselves from that which is
perishable and servile and to labour at the things, which are imperishable and
by nature free; and do we not remember that no man either hurts another or does
good to another, but that a man's opinion about each thing is that which hurts
him, is that which overturns him; this is fighting, this is civil discord, this
is war? That which made Eteocles and Polynices enemies was nothing else than
this opinion which they had about royal power, their opinion about exile, that
the one is the extreme of evils, the other the greatest good. Now this is the
nature of every man to seek the good, to avoid the bad; to consider him who
deprives us of the one and involves us in the other an enemy and treacherous,
even if he be a brother, or a son or a father. For nothing is more akin to us
than the good: therefore if these things are good and evil, neither is a father
a friend to sons, nor a brother to a brother, but all the world is everywhere
full of enemies, treacherous men, and sycophants. But if the will, being what
it ought to be, is the only good; and if the will, being such as it ought not
to be, is the only evil, where is there any strife, where is there reviling?
about what? about the things which do not concern us? and strife with whom?
with the ignorant, the unhappy, with those who are deceived about the chief
things?
    Remembering this Socrates managed his own house and endured a very
ill-tempered wife and a foolish son. For in what did she show her bad temper?
In pouring water on his head as much as she liked, and in trampling on the
cake. And what is this to me, if I think that these things are nothing to me?
But this is my business; and neither tyrant shall check my will nor a master;
nor shall the many check me who am only one, nor shall the stronger check me
who am the weaker; for this power of being free from check is given by God to
every man. For these opinions make love in a house, concord in a state, among
nations peace, and gratitude to God; they make a man in all things cheerful in
externals as about things which belong to others, as about things which are of
no value. We indeed are able to write and to read these things, and to praise
them when they are read, but we do not even come near to being convinced of
them. Therefore what is said of the Lacedaemonians, "Lions at home, but in
Ephesus foxes," will fit in our case also, "Lions in the school, but out of it
foxes."

Against those who lament over being pitied

    "I am grieved," a man says, "at being pitied." Whether, then, is the fact
of your being pitied a thing which concerns you or those who pity you? Well, is
it in your power to stop this pity? "It is in my power, if I show them that I
do not require pity." And whether, then, are you in the condition of not
deserving pity, or are you not in that condition? "I think I am not: but these
persons do not pity me for the things for which, if they ought to pity me, it
would be proper, I mean, for my faults; but they pity me for my poverty, for
not possessing honourable offices, for diseases and deaths and other such
things." Whether, then, are you prepared to convince the many that not one of
these things is an evil, but that it is possible for a man who is poor and has
no office and enjoys no honour to be happy; or to show yourself to them as rich
and in power? For the second of these things belong, to a man who is boastful,
silly and good for nothing. And consider by what means the pretense must be
supported. It will be necessary for you to hire slaves and to possess a few
silver vessels, and to exhibit them in public, if it is possible, though they
are often the same, and to attempt to conceal the fact that they are the same,
and to have splendid garments, and all other things for display, and to show
that you are a man honoured by the great, and to try to sup at their houses, or
to be supposed to sup there, and as to your person to employ some mean arts,
that you may appear to be more handsome and nobler than you are. These things
you must contrive, if you choose to go by the second path in order not to be
pitied. But the first way is both impracticable and long, to attempt the very
thing which Zeus has not been able to do, to convince all men what things are
good and bad. Is this power given to you? This only is given to you, to
convince yourself; and you have not convinced yourself. Then I ask you, do you
attempt to persuade other men? and who has lived so long with you as you with
yourself? and who has so much power of convincing you as you have of convincing
yourself; and who is better disposed and nearer to you than you are to
yourself? How, then, have you not convinced yourself in order to learn? At
present are not things upside down? Is this what you have been earnest about
doing, to learn to be free from grief and free from disturbance, and not to be
humbled, and to be free? Have you not heard, then, that there is only one way
which leads to this end, to give up the things which do not depend on the will,
to withdraw from them, and to admit that they belong to others? For another
man, then, to have an opinion about you, of what kind is it? "It is a thing
independent of the will." Then is it nothing to you? "It is nothing." When,
then, you are still vexed at this and disturbed, do you think that you are
convinced about good and evil?
    Will you not, then, letting others alone, be to yourself both scholar and
teacher? "The rest of mankind will look after this, whether it is to their
interest to be and to pass their lives in a state contrary to nature: but to me
no man is nearer than myself. What, then, is the meaning of this, that I have
listened to the words of the philosophers and I assent to them, but in fact I
am no way made easier? Am I so stupid? And yet, in all other things such as I
have chosen, I have not been found very stupid; but I learned letters quickly,
and to wrestle, and geometry, and to resolve syllogisms. Has not, then, reason
convinced me? and indeed no other things have I from the beginning so approved
and chosen: and now I read about these things, hear about them, write about
them; I have so far discovered no reason stronger than this. In what, then, am
I deficient? Have the contrary opinions not been eradicated from me? Have the
notions themselves not been exercised nor used to be applied to action, but as
armour are laid aside and rusted and cannot fit me? And yet neither in the
exercises of the palaestra, nor in writing or reading am I satisfied with
learning, but I turn up and down the syllogisms which are proposed, and I make
others, and sophistical syllogisms also. But the necessary theorems, by
proceeding from which a man can become free from grief, fear, passions,
hindrance, and a free man, these I do not exercise myself in nor do I practice
in these the proper practice. Then I care about what others will say of me,
whether I shall appear to them worth notice, whether I shall appear happy."
    Wretched man, will you not see what you. are saying about yourself? What do
you appear to yourself to be? in your opinions, in your desires, in your
aversions from things, in your movements, in your preparation, in your designs,
and in other acts suitable to a man? But do you trouble yourself about this,
whether others pity you? "Yes, but I am pitied not as I ought to be." Are you
then pained at this? and is he who is pained, an object of pity? "Yes." How,
then, are you pitied not as you ought to be? For by the very act that you feel
about being pitied, you make yourself deserving of pity. What then says
Antisthenes? Have you not heard? "It is a royal thing, O Cyrus, to do right and
to be ill-spoken of." My head is sound, and all think that I have the headache.
What do I care for that? I am free from fever, and people sympathize with me as
if I had a fever: "Poor man, for so long a time you have not ceased to have
fever." I also say with a sorrowful countenance: "In truth it is now a long
time that I have been ill." "What will happen then?" "As God may please": and
at the same time I secretly laugh at those who are pitying me. What, then,
hinders the same being done in this case also? I am poor, but I have a right
opinion about poverty. Why, then, do I care if they pity me for my poverty? I
am not in power; but others are: and I have the opinion which I ought to have
about having and not having power. Let them look to it who pity me; but I am
neither hungry nor thirsty nor do I suffer cold; but because they are hungry or
thirsty they think that I too am. What, then, shall I do for them? Shall I go
about and proclaim and say: "Be not mistaken, men, I am very well, I do not
trouble myself about poverty, nor want of power, nor in a word about anything
else than right opinions. These I have free from restraint, I care for nothing
at all." What foolish talk is this? How do I possess right opinions when I am
not content with being what I am, but am uneasy about what I am supposed to be?
    "But," you say, "others will get more and be preferred to me." What, then,
is more reasonable than for those who have laboured about anything to have more
in that thing in which they have laboured? They have laboured for power, you
have laboured about opinions; and they have laboured for wealth, you for the
proper use of appearances. See if they have more than you in this about which
you have laboured, and which they neglect; if they assent better than you with
respect to the natural rules of things; if they are less disappointed than you
in their desires; if they fall less into things which they would avoid than you
do; if in their intentions, if in the things which they propose to themselves,
if in their purposes, if in their motions toward an object they take a better
aim; if they better observe a proper behavior, as men, as sons, as parents, and
so on as to the other names by which we express the relations of life. But if
they exercise power, and you do not, will you not choose to tell yourself the
truth, that you do nothing for the sake of this, and they do all? But it is
most unreasonable that he who looks after anything should obtain less than he
who does not look after it.
    "Not so: but since I care about right opinions, it more reasonable for me
to have power." Yes in the matter about which you do care, in opinions. But in
a matter in which they have cared more than you, give way to them. The case is
just the same as if, because you have right opinions, you thought that in using
the bow you should hit the mark better than an archer, and in working in metal
you should succeed better than a smith. Give up, then, your earnestness about
opinions and employ yourself about the things which you wish to acquire; and
then lament, if you do not succeed; for you deserve to lament. But now you say
that you are occupied with other things, that you are looking after other
things; but the many say this truly, that one act has no community with
another. He who has risen in the morning seeks whom he shall salute, to whom he
shall say something agreeable, to whom he shall send a present, how he shall
please the dancing man, how by bad behavior to one he may please another. When
he prays, he prays about these things; when he sacrifices, he sacrifices for
these things: the saying of Pythagoras
       Let sleep not come upon thy languid eyes
he transfers to these things. "Where have I failed in the matters pertaining to
flattery?" "What have I done?" Anything like a free man, anything like a
noble-minded man? And if he finds anything of the kind, he blames and accuses
himself: "Why did you say this? Was it not in your power to lie? Even the
philosophers say that nothing hinders us from telling a lie." But do you, if
indeed you have cared about nothing else except the proper use of appearances,
as soon as you have risen in the morning reflect, "What do I want in order to
be free from passion, and free from perturbation? What am I? Am I a poor body,
a piece of property, a thing of which something is said? I am none of these.
But what am I? I am a rational animal. What then is required of me?" Reflect on
your acts. "Where have I omitted the things which conduce to happiness? What
have I done which is either unfriendly or unsocial? what have I not done as to
these things which I ought to have done?"
    So great, then, being, the difference in desires, actions, wishes, would
you still have the same share with others in those things about which you have
not laboured, and they have laboured? Then are you surprised if they pity you,
and are you vexed? But they are not vexed if you pity them. Why? Because they
are convinced that they have that which is good, and you are not convinced. For
this reason you are not satisfied with your own, but you desire that which they
have: but they are satisfied with their own, and do not desire what you have:
since, if you were really convinced that with respect to what is good, it is
you who are the possessor of it and that they have missed it, you would not
even have thought of what they say about you.

On freedom from fear

    What makes the tyrant formidable? "The guards," you say, "and their swords,
and the men of the bedchamber and those who exclude them who would enter." Why,
then, if you bring a boy to the tyrant when he is with his guards, is he not
afraid; or is it because the child does not understand these things? If, then,
any man does understand what guards are and that they have swords, and comes to
the tyrant for this very purpose because he wishes to die on account of some
circumstance and seeks to die easily by the hand of another, is he afraid of
the guards? "No, for he wishes for the thing which makes the guards
formidable." If, then, neither any man wishing to die nor to live by all means,
but only as it may be permitted, approaches the tyrant, what hinders him from
approaching the tyrant without fear? "Nothing." If, then, a man has the same
opinion about his property as the man whom I have instanced has about his body;
and also about his children and his wife, and in a word is so affected by some
madness or despair that he cares not whether he possesses them or not, but like
children who are playing, with shells care about the play, but do not trouble
themselves about the shells, so he too has set no value on the materials, but
values the pleasure that he has with them and the occupation, what tyrant is
then formidable to him or what guards or what swords?
    Then through madness is it possible for a man to be so disposed toward
these things, and the Galilaens through habit, and is it possible that no man
can learn from reason and from demonstration that God has made all the things
in the universe and the universe itself completely free from hindrance and
perfect, and the parts of it for the use of the whole? All other animals indeed
are incapable of comprehending the administration of it; but the rational
animal, man, has faculties for the consideration of all these and for
understanding that it is a part, and what kind of a part it is, and that it is
right for the parts to be subordinate to the whole. And besides this being
naturally noble, magnanimous and free, man sees that of the things which
surround him some are free from hindrance and in his power, and the other
things are subject to hindrance and in the power of others; that the things
which are free from hindrance are in the power of the will; and those which are
subject to hinderance are the things which are not in the power of the will.
And, for this reason, if he thinks that his good and his interest be in these
things only which are free from hindrance and in his own power, he will be
free, prosperous, happy, free from harm, magnanimous pious, thankful to God for
all things; in no matter finding fault with any of the things which have not
been put in his power, nor blaming any of them. But if he thinks that his good
and his interest are in externals and in things which are not in the power of
his will, he must of necessity be hindered, be impeded, be a slave to those who
have the power over things which he admires and fears; and he must of necessity
be impious because he thinks that he is harmed by God, and he must be unjust
because he always claims more than belongs to him; and he must of necessity be
abject and mean.
    What hinders a man, who has clearly separated these things, from living
with a light heart and bearing easily the reins, quietly expecting everything
which can happen, and enduring that which has already happened? "Would you have
me to bear poverty?" Come and you will know what poverty is when it has found
one who can act well the part of a poor man. "Would you have me to possess
power?" Let me have power, and also the trouble of it. "Well, banishment?"
Wherever I shall go, there it will be well with me; for here also where I am,
it was not because of the place that it was well with me, but because of my
opinions which I shall carry off with me: for neither can any man deprive me of
them; but my opinions alone are mine and they cannot he taken from me, and I am
satisfied while I have them, wherever I may be and whatever I am doing. "But
now it is time to die." Why do you say "to die"? Make no tragedy show of the
thing, but speak of it as it is: it is now time for the matter to be resolved
into the things out of which it was composed. And what is the formidable thing
here? what is going to perish of the things which are in the universe? what new
thing or wondrous is going to happen? Is it for this reason that a tyrant is
formidable? Is it for this reason that the guards appear to have swords which
are large and sharp? Say this to others; but I have considered about all these
thins; no man has power over me. I have been made free; I know His commands, no
man can now lead me as a slave. I have a proper person to assert my freedom; I
have proper judges. Are you not the master of my body? What, then, is that to
me? Are you not the master of my property? What, then, is that to me? Are you
not the master of my exile or of my chains? Well, from all these things and all
the poor body itself I depart at your bidding, when you please. Make trial of
your power, and you will know how far it reaches.
    Whom then can I still fear? Those who are over the bedchamber? Lest they
should do, what? Shut me out? If they find that I wish to enter, let them shut
me out. "Why, then, do you go to the doors?" Because I think it befits me,
while the play lasts, to join in it. "How, then, are you not shut out?"
Because, unless some one allows me to go in, I do not choose to ,o in, but am
always content with that I which happens; for I think that what God chooses is
better than what I choose. I will attach myself as a minister and follower to
Him; I have the same movements as He has, I have the same desires; in a word, I
have the same will. There is no shutting out for me, but for those who would
force their in. Why, then, do not I force my way in? Because I know that
nothing good is distributed within to those who enter. But when I hear any man
called fortunate because he is honoured by Caesar, I say, "What does he happen
to get?" A province. Does he also obtain an opinion such as he ought? The
office of a Prefect. Does he also obtain the power of using his office well?
Why do I still strive to enter? A man scatters dried figs and nuts: the
children seize them and fight with one another; men do not, for they think them
to be a small matter. But if a man should throw about shells, even the children
do not seize them. Provinces are distributed: let children look to that. Money
is distributed: let children look to that. Praetorships, consulships are
distributed: let children scramble for them, let them be shut out, beaten, kiss
the hands of the giver, of the slaves: but to me these are only dried figs and
nuts. What then? If you fail to get them, while Caesar is scattering them
about, do not be troubled: if a dried fig come into your lap, take it and eat
it; for so far you may value even a fig. But if I shall stoop down and turn
another over, or be turned over by another, and shall flatter those who have
got into chamber, neither is a dried fig worth the trouble, nor anything else
of the things which are not good, which the philosophers have persuaded me not
to think good.
    Show me the swords of the guards. "See how big they are, and how sharp."
What, then, do these big and sharp swords do? "They kill." And what does a
fever do? "Nothing else." And what else a tile? "Nothing else." Would you then
have me to wonder at these things and worship them, and go about as the slave
of all of them? I hope that this will not happen: but when I have once learned
that everything which has come into existence must also go out of it, that the
universe may not stand still nor be impeded, I no longer consider it any
difference whether a fever shall do it, or a tile, or a soldier. But if a man
must make a comparison between these things, I know that the soldier will do it
with less trouble, and quicker. When, then, I neither fear anything which a
tyrant can do to me, nor desire anything which he can give, why do I still look
on with wonder? Why am I still confounded? Why do I fear the guards? Why am I
pleased if he speaks to me in a friendly way, and receives me, and why do I
tell others how he spoke to me? Is he a Socrates, is he a Diogenes that his
praise should be a proof of what I am? Have I been eager to imitate his morals?
But I keep up the play and go to him, and serve him so long as he does not bid
me to do anything foolish or unreasonable. But if he says to me, "Go and bring
Leon of Salamis," I say to him, "Seek another, for I am no longer playing."
"Lead him away." I follow; that is part of the play. "But your head will be
taken off." Does the tyrant's head always remain where it is, and the heads of
you who obey him? "But you will be cast out unburied." If the corpse is I, I
shall be cast out; but if I am different from the corpse, speak more properly
according as the fact is, and do not think of frightening me. These things are
formidable to children and fools. But if any man has once entered a
philosopher's school and knows not what he is, he deserves to be full of fear
and to flatter those whom afterward he used to flatter; if he has not yet
learned that he is not flesh nor bones nor sinews, but he is that which makes
use of these parts of the body and governs them and follows the appearances of
things.
    "Yes, but this talk makes us despise the laws." And what kind of talk makes
men more obedient to the laws who employ such talk? And the things which are in
the power of a fool are not law. And yet see how this talk makes us disposed as
we ought to be even to these men; since it teaches us to claim in opposition to
them none of the things in which they are able to surpass us. This talk teaches
us, as to the body, to give it up, as to property, to give that up also, as to
children, parents, brothers, to retire from these, to give up all; It only
makes an exception of the opinions, which even Zeus has willed to be the select
property of every man. What transgression of the laws is there here, what
folly? Where you are superior and stronger, there I give way to you: on the
other hand, where I am superior, do you yield to me; for I have studied this,
and you have not. It is your study to live in houses with floors formed of
various stones, how your slaves and dependents shall serve you, how you shall
wear fine clothing, have many hunting men, lute players, and tragic actors. Do
I claim any of these? have you made any study of opinions and of your own
rational faculty? Do you know of what parts it is composed, how they are
brought together, how they are connected, what powers it has, and of what kind?
Why then are you vexed, if another, who has made it his study, has the
advantage over you in these things? "But these things are the greatest." And
who hinders you from being employed about these things and looking after them?
And who has a better stock of books, of leisure, of persons to aid you? Only
turn your mind at last to these things, attend, if it be only a short time, to
your own ruling faculty: consider what this is that you possess, and whence it
came, this which uses all others, and tries them, and selects and rejects. But
so long as you employ yourself about externals you will possess them as no man
else does; but you will have this such as you choose to have it, sordid and
neglected.

Against those who hastily rush into the use of the philosophic dress

    Never praise nor blame a man because of the things which are common, and do
not ascribe to him any skill or want of skill; and thus you will be free from
rashness and from malevolence. "This man bathes very quickly." Does he then do
wrong? Certainly not. But what does he do? He bathes very quickly. Are all
things then done well? By no means: but the acts which proceed from right
opinions are done well; and those which proceed from bad opinions are done ill.
But do you, until you know the opinion from which a man does each thing,
neither praise nor blame the act. But the opinion is not easily discovered from
the external things. "This man is a carpenter." Why? "Because he uses an ax."
What, then, is this to the matter? "This man is a musician because he sings."
And what does that signify? "This man is a philosopher. Because he wears a
cloak and long hair." And what does a juggler wear? For this reason if a man
sees any philosopher acting indecently, immediately he says, "See what the
philosopher is doing"; but he ought because of the man's indecent behavior
rather to say that he is not a philosopher. For if this is the preconceived
notion of a philosopher and what he professes, to wear a cloak and long hair,
men would say well; but if what he professes is this rather, to keep himself
free from faults, why do we not rather, because he does not make good his
professions, take from him the name of philosopher? For so we do in the case of
all other arts. When a man sees another handling an ax badly, he does not say,
"What is the use of the carpenter's art? See how badly carpenters do their
work"; but he says just the contrary, "This man is not a carpenter, for he uses
an ax badly." In the same way if a man hears another singing badly, he does not
say, "See how musicians sing"; but rather, "This man is not a musician." But it
is in the matter of philosophy only that people do this. When they see a man
acting contrary to the profession of a philosopher, they do not take away his
title, but they assume him to be a philosopher, and from his acts deriving the
fact that he is behaving indecently they conclude that there is no use in
philosophy.
    What, then, is the reason of this? Because we attach value to the notion of
a carpenter, and to that of a musician, and to the notion of other artisans in
like manner, but not to that of a philosopher, and we judge from externals only
that it is a thing confused and ill defined. And what other kind of art has a
name from the dress and the hair; and has not theorems and a material and an
end? What, then, is the material of the philosopher? Is it a cloak? No, but
reason. What is his end? is it to wear a cloak? No, but to possess the reason
in a right state. Of what kind are his theorems? Are they those about the way
in which the beard becomes great or the hair long? No, but rather what Zeno
says, to know the elements of reason, what kind of a thing each of them is, and
how they are fitted to one another, and what things are consequent upon them.
Will you not, then, see first if he does what he professes when he acts in an
unbecoming manner, and then blame his study? But now when you yourself are
acting in a sober way, you say in consequence of what he seems to you to be
doing wrong, "Look at the philosopher," as if it were proper to call by the
name of philosopher one who does these things; and further, "This is the
conduct of a philosopher." But you do not say, "Look at the carpenter," when
you know that a carpenter is an adulterer or you see him to be a glutton; nor
do you say, "See the musician." Thus to a certain degree even you perceive the
profession of a philosopher, but you fall away from the notion, and you are
confused through want of care.
    But even the philosophers themselves as they are called pursue the thing by
beginning with things which are common to them and others: as soon as they have
assumed a cloak and grown a beard, they say, "I am a philosopher." But no man
will say, "I am a musician," if he has bought a plectrum and a lute: nor will
he say, "I am a smith," if he has put on a cap and apron. But the dress is
fitted to the art; and they take their name from the art, and not from the
dress. For this reason Euphrates used to say well, "A long time I strove to be
a philosopher without people knowing it; and this," he said, "was useful to me:
for first I knew that when I did anything well, I did not do it for the sake of
the spectators, but for the sake of myself: I ate well for the sake of myself;
I had my countenance well composed and my walk: all for myself and for God.
Then, as I struggled alone, so I alone also was in danger: in no respect
through me, if I did anything base or unbecoming, was philosophy endangered;
nor did I injure the many by doing anything wrong as a philosopher. For this
reason those who did not know my purpose used to wonder how it was that, while
I conversed and lived altogether with all philosophers, I was not a philosopher
myself. And what was the harm for me to be known to be a philosopher by my acts
and not by outward marks?" See how I eat, how I drink, how I sleep, how I bear
and forbear, how I co-operate, how I employ desire, how I employ aversion, how
I maintain the relations, those which are natural or those which are acquired,
how free from confusion, how free from hindrance. Judge of me from this, if you
can. But if you are so deaf and blind that you cannot conceive even Hephaestus
to be a good smith, unless you see the cap on his head, what is the harm in not
being recognized by so foolish a judge?
    So Socrates was not known to be a philosopher by most persons; and they
used to come to him and ask to be introduced to philosophers. Was he vexed then
as we are, and did he say, "And do you not think that I am a philosopher?" No,
but he would take them and introduce them, being satisfied with one thing, with
being a philosopher; and being pleased also with not being thought to be a
philosopher, he was not annoyed: for he thought of his own occupation. What is
the work of an honourable and good man? To have many pupils? By no means. They
will look to this matter who are earnest about it. But was it his business to
examine carefully difficult theorems? Others will look after these matters
also. In what, then, was he, and who was he and whom did he wish to be? He was
in that wherein there was hurt and advantage. "If any man can damage me," he
says, "I am doing nothing: if I am waiting for another man to do me good, I am
nothing. If I anguish for anything, and it does not happen, I am unfortunate."
To such a contest he invited every man, and I do not think that he would have
declined the contest with any one. What do you suppose? was it by proclaiming
and saying, "I am such a man?" Far from it, but by being such a man. For
further, this is the character of a fool and a boaster to say, "I am free from
passions and disturbance: do not be ignorant, my friends, that while you are
uneasy and disturbed about things of no value, I alone am free from all
perturbation." So is it not enough for you to feel no pain, unless you make
this proclamation: "Come together all who are suffering gout, pains in the
head, fever, ye who are lame, blind, and observe that I am sound from every
ailment." This is empty and disagreeable to hear, unless like Aesculapius you
are able to show immediately by what kind of treatment they also shall be
immediately free from disease, and unless you show your own health as an
example.
    For such is the Cynic who is honoured with the sceptre and the diadem of
Zeus, and says, "That you may see, O men, that you seek happiness and
tranquillity not where it is, but where it is not, behold I am sent to you by
God as an example. I who have neither property nor house, nor wife nor
children, nor even a bed, nor coat nor household utensil; and see how healthy I
am: try me, and if you see that I am free from perturbations, hear the remedies
and how I have been cured." This is both philanthropic and noble. But see whose
work it is, the work of Zeus, or of him whom He may judge worthy of this
service, that he may never exhibit anything to the many, by which he shall make
of no effect his own testimony, whereby he gives testimony to virtue, and bears
evidence against external things:
       His beauteous face pales his cheeks
       He wipes a tear.
    And not this only, but he neither desires nor seeks anything, nor man nor
place nor amusement, as children seek the vintage or holidays; always fortified
by modesty as others are fortified by walls and doors and doorkeepers.
    But now, being only moved to philosophy, as those who have a bad stomach
are moved to some kinds of food which they soon loathe, straightway toward the
sceptre and to the royal power. They let the hair grow, they assume the cloak,
they show the shoulder bare, they quarrel with those whom they meet; and if
they see a man in a thick winter coat, they quarrel with him. Man, first
exercise yourself in winter weather: see your movements that they are not those
of a man with a bad stomach or those of a longing woman. First strive that it
be not known what you are: be a philosopher to yourself a short time. Fruit
grows thus: the seed must be buried for some time, hid, grow slowly in order
that it may come to perfection. But if it produces the ear before the jointed
stem, it is imperfect, a produce of the garden of Adonis. Such a poor plant are
you also: you have blossomed too soon; the cold weather will scorch you up. See
what the husbandmen say about seeds when there is warm weather too early. They
are afraid lest the seeds should be too luxuriant, and then a single frost
should lay hold of them and show that they are too forward. Do you also
consider, my man: you have shot out too soon, you have hurried toward a little
fame before the proper season: you think that you are something, a fool among
fools: you will be caught by the frost, and rather you have been frost-bitten
in the root below, but your upper parts still blossom a little, and for this
reason you think that you are still alive and flourishing. Allow us to ripen in
the natural way: why do you bare us? why do you force us? we are not yet able
to bear the air. Let the root grow, then acquire the first joint, then the
second, and then the third: in this way, then, the fruit will naturally force
itself out, even if I do not choose. For who that is pregnant and I filled with
such great principles does not also perceive his own powers and move toward the
corresponding acts? A bull is not ignorant of his own nature and his powers,
when a wild beast shows itself, nor does he wait for one to urge him on; nor a
dog when he sees a wild animal. But if I have the powers of a good man, shall I
wait for you to prepare me for my own acts? At present I have them not, believe
me. Why then do you wish me to be withered up before the time, as you have been
withered up?

To a person who had been changed to a character of shamelessness

    When you see another man in the possession of power, set against this the
fact that you have not the want of power; when you see another rich, see what
you possess in place of riches: for if you possess nothing in place of them,
you are miserable; but if you have not the want of riches, know that you
possess more than this man possesses and what is worth much more. Another man
possesses a handsome woman: you have the satisfaction of not desiring a
handsome wife. Do these things appear to you to he small? And how much would
these persons give, these very men who are rich and in possession of power, and
live with handsome women, to be able to despise riches and power and these very
women whom they love and enjoy? Do you not know, then, what is the thirst of a
man who has a fever? He possesses that which is in no degree like the thirst of
a man who is in health: for the man who is in health ceases to be thirsty after
he has drunk; but the sick man, being pleased for a short time, has a nausea;
he converts the drink into bile, vomits, is griped, and more thirsty. It is
such a thing to have desire of riches and to possess riches, desire of power
and to possess power, desire of a beautiful woman and to sleep with her: to
this is added jealousy, fear of being deprived of the thing which you love,
indecent words, indecent thoughts, unseemly acts.
    "And what do I lose?" you will say. My man, you were modest, and you are so
no longer. Have you lost nothing? In place of Chrysippus and Zeno you read
Aristides and Evenus; have you lost nothing? In place of Socrates and Diogenes,
you admire him who is able to corrupt and seduce most women. You wish to appear
handsome and try to make yourself so, though you are not. You like to display
splendid clothes that you may attract women; and if you find any fine oil, yon
imagine that you are happy. But formerly you did not think of any such thing,
but only where there should be decent talk, a worthy man, and a generous
conception. Therefore you slept like a man, walked forth like a man, wore a
manly dress, and used to talk in a way becoming a good man; then do you say to
me, "I have lost nothing?" So do men lose nothing more than coin? Is not
modesty lost? Is not decent behavior lost? is it that he who has lost these
things has sustained no loss? Perhaps you think that not one of these things is
a loss. But there was a time when you reckoned this the only loss and damage,
and you were anxious that no man should disturb you from these words and
actions.
    Observe, you are disturbed from these good words and actions by nobody but
by yourself. Fight with yourself, restore yourself to decency, to modesty, to
liberty. If any man ever told you this about me, that a person forces me to be
an adulterer, to wear such a dress as yours, to perfume myself with oils, would
you not have gone and with your own hand have killed the man who thus
calumniated me? Now will you not help yourself? and how much easier is this
help? There is no need to kill any man, nor to put him in chains, nor to treat
him with contumely, nor to enter the Forum, but it is only necessary for you to
speak to yourself who will be the most easily persuaded, with whom no man has
more power of persuasion than yourself. First of all, condemn what you are
doing, and then, when you have condemned it, do not despair of yourself, and be
not in the condition of those men of mean spirit, who, when they have once
given in, surrender themselves completely and are carried away as if by a
torrent. But see what the trainers of boys do. Has the boy fallen? "Rise," they
say, "wrestle again till you are made strong." Do you also do something of the
same kind: for be well assured that nothing is more tractable than the human
soul. You must exercise the will, and the thing is done, it is set right: as on
the other hand, only fall a-nodding, and the thing is lost: for from within
comes ruin and from within comes help. "Then what good do I gain?" And what
greater good do you seek than this? From a shameless man you will become a
modest man, from a disorderly you will become an orderly man, from a faithless
you will become a faithful man, from a man of unbridled habits a sober man. If
you seek anything more than this, go on doing what you are doing: not even a
God can now help you.

What things we ought to despise, and what things we ought to value

    The difficulties of all men are about external things, their helplessness
is about externals. "What shall I do, how will it be, how will it turn out,
will this happen, will that?" All these are the words of those who are turning
themselves to things which are not within the power of the will. For who says,
"How shall I not assent to that which is false? how shall I not turn away from
the truth?" If a man be of such a good disposition as to be anxious about these
things, I will remind him of this: "Why are you anxious? The thing is in your
own power: be assured: do not be precipitate in assenting before you apply the
natural rule." On the other side, if a man is anxious about desire, lest it
fail in its purpose and miss its end, and with respect to the avoidance of
things, lest he should fall into that which he would avoid, I will first kiss
him, because he throws away the things about which others are in a flutter, and
their fears, and employs his thoughts about his own affairs and his own
condition. Then I shall say to him: "If you do not choose to desire that which
you will fall to obtain nor to attempt to avoid that into which you will fall,
desire nothing which belongs to others, nor try to avoid any of the things
which are not in your power. If you do not observe this rule, you must of
necessity fall in your desires and fall into that which you would avoid. What
is the difficulty here? where is there room for the words, 'How will it be?'
and 'How will it turn out?' and, 'Will this happen or that?'
    Now is not that which will happen independent of the will? "Yes." And the
nature of good and of evil, is it not in the things which are within the power
of the will? "Yes." Is it in your power, then, to treat according to nature
everything which happens? Can any person hinder you? "No man." No longer then
say to me, "How will it be?" For however it may be, you will dispose of it
well, and the result to you will be a fortunate one. What would Hercules have
been if he had said, "How shall a great lion not appear to me, or a great boar,
or savage men?" And what do you care for that? If a great boar appear, you will
fight a greater fight: if bad men appear, you relieve the earth of the bad.
"Suppose, then, that I may lose my life in this way." You will die a good man,
doing a noble act. For since we must certainly die, of necessity a man must be
found doing something, either following the employment of a husbandman, or
digging, or trading, or serving in a consulship or suffering from indigestion
or from diarrhea. What then do you wish to be doing, when you are found by
death? I for my part would wish to be found doing something which belongs to a
man, beneficent, suitable to the general interest, noble. But if I cannot be
found doing things so great, I would be found doing at least that which I
cannot be hindered from doing, that which is permitted me to do, correcting,
myself, cultivating the faculty which makes use of appearances, labouring at
freedom from the affects, rendering to the relations of life their due; if I
succeed so far, also touching on the third topic, safety in the forming
judgements about things. If death surprises me when I am busy about these
things, it is enough for me if I can stretch out my hands to God and say:
    "The means which I have received from Thee for seeing Thy administration
and following it, I have not neglected: I have not dishonoured Thee by my acts:
see how I have used my perceptions, see how I have used my preconceptions: have
I ever blamed Thee? have I been discontented with anything that happens, or
wished it to be otherwise? have I wished to transgress the relations? That Thou
hast given me life, I thank Thee for what Thou has given me: so long as I have
used the things which are Thine, I am content; take them back and place them
wherever Thou mayest choose; for Thine were all things, Thou gavest them to
me." Is it not enough to depart in this state of mind, and what life is better
and more becoming than that of a man who is in this state of mind? and what end
is more happy?
    But that this may be done, a man must receive no small things, nor are the
things small which he must lose. You cannot both wish to be a consul and to
have these things, and to be eager to have lands and these things also; and to
be solicitous about slaves and about yourself. But if you wish for anything
which belongs to another, that which is your own is lost. This is the nature of
the thing: nothing is given or had for nothing. And where is the wonder? If you
wish to be a consul, you must keep awake, run about, kiss hands, waste yourself
with exhaustion at other men's doors, say and do many things unworthy of a free
man, send gifts to many, daily presents to some. And what is the thing that is
got? Twelve bundles of rods, to sit three or four times on the tribunal, to
exhibit the games in the Circus and to give suppers in small baskets. Or, if
you do not agree about this, let some one show me what there is besides these
things. In order, then, to secure freedom from passions, tranquillity, to sleep
well when you do sleep, to be really awake when you are awake, to fear nothing,
to be anxious about nothing, will you spend nothing and give no labour? But if
anything belonging to you be lost while you are thus busied, or be wasted
badly, or another obtains what you ought to have obtained, will you immediately
be vexed at what has happened? Will you not take into the account on the other
side what you receive and for what, how much for how much? Do you expect to
have for nothing things so great? And how can you? One work has no community
with another. You cannot have both external things after bestowing care on them
and your own ruling faculty: but if you would have those, give up this. If you
do not, you will have neither this nor that, while you are drawn in different
ways to both. The oil will be spilled, the household vessels will perish: but I
shall be free from passions. There will be a fire when I am not present, and
the books will be destroyed: but I shall treat appearances according to nature.
"Well; but I shall have nothing to eat." If I am so unlucky, death is a
harbour; and death is the harbour for all; this is the place of refuge; and for
this reason not one of the things in life is difficult: as soon as you choose,
you are out of the house, and are smoked no more. Why, then, are you anxious,
why do you lose your sleep, why do you not straightway, after considering
wherein your good is and your evil, say, "Both of them are in my power? Neither
can any man deprive me of the good, nor involve me in the bad against my will.
Why do I not throw myself down and snore? for all that I have is safe. As to
the things which belong to others, he will look to them who gets them, as they
may be given by Him who has the power. Who am I who wish to have them in this
way or in that? is a power ofselecting them given to me? has any person made me
the dispenser of them? Those things are enough for me over which I have power:
I ought to manage them as well as I can: and all the rest, as the Master of
them may choose."
    When a man has these things before his eyes, does he keep awake and turn
hither and thither? What would he have, or what does he regret, Patroclus or
Antilochus or Menelaus? For when did he suppose that any of his friends was
immortal, and when had he not before his eyes that on the morrow or the day
after he or his friend must die? "Yes," he says, "but I thought that he would
survive me and bring up my son." You were a fool for that reason, and you were
thinking of what was uncertain. Why, then, do you not blame yourself, and sit
crying like girls? "But he used to set my food before me." Because he was
alive, you fool, but now he cannot: but Automedon will set it before you, and
if Automedon also dies, you will find another. But if the pot, in which your
meat was cooked, should be broken, must you die of hunger, because you have not
the pot which you are accustomed to? Do you not send and buy a new pot? He
says:
       "No greater ill could fall on me."
Why is this your ill? Do you, then, instead of removing it, blame your mother
for not foretelling it to you that you might continue grieving from that time?
What do you think? do you not suppose that Homer wrote this that we may learn
that those of noblest birth, the strongest and the richest, the most handsome,
when they have not the opinions which they ought to have, are not prevented
from being most wretched and unfortunate?

About Purity

    Some persons raise a question whether the social feeling is contained in
the nature of man; and yet I think that these same persons would have no doubt
that love of purity is certainly contained in it, and that, if man is
distinguished from other animals by anything, he is distinguished by this.
When, then, we see any other animal cleaning itself, we are accustomed to speak
of the act with surprise, and to add that the animal is acting like a man: and,
on the other hand, if a man blames an animal for being dirty, straightway as if
we were making an excuse for it, we say that of course the animal is not a
human creature. So we suppose that there is something superior in man, and that
we first receive it from the Gods. For since the Gods by their nature are pure
and free from corruption, so far as men approach them by reason, so far do they
cling to purity and to a love of purity. But since it is impossible that man's
nature can be altogether pure being mixed of such materials, reason is applied,
as far as it is possible, and reason endeavours to make human nature love
    The first, then, and highest purity is that which is in the soul; and we
say the same of impurity. Now you could not discover the impurity of the soul
as you could discover that of the body: but as to the soul, what else could you
find in it than that which makes it filthy in respect to the acts which are her
own? Now the acts of the soul are movement toward an object or movement from
it, desire, aversion, preparation, design, assent. What, then, is it which in
these acts makes the soul filthy and impure? Nothing else than her own bad
judgements. Consequently, the impurity of the soul is the soul's bad opinions;
and the purification of the soul is the planting in it of proper opinions; and
the soul is pure which has proper opinions, for the soul alone in her own acts
is free from perturbation and pollution.
    Now we ought to work at something like this in the body also, as far as we
can. It was impossible for the defluxions of the nose not to run when man has
such a mixture in his body. For this reason, nature has made hands and the
nostrils themselves as channels for carrying off the humours. If, then, a man
sucks up the defluxions, I say that he is not doing the act of a man. It was
impossible for a man's feet not to be made muddy and not be soiled at all when
he passes through dirty places. For this reason, nature has made water and
hands. It was impossible that some impurity should not remain in the teeth from
eating: for this reason, she says, wash the teeth. Why? In order that you may
be a man and not a wild beast or a hog. It was impossible that from the sweat
and the pressing of the clothes there should not remain some impurity about the
body which requires to be cleaned away. For this reason water, oil, hands,
towels, scrapers, nitre, sometimes all other kinds of means are necessary for
cleaning the body. You do not act so: but the smith will take off the rust from
the iron, and be will have tools prepared for this purpose, and you yourself
wash the platter when you are going to eat, if you are not completely impure
and dirty: but will you not wash the body nor make it clean? "Why?" he replies.
I will tell you again; in the first place, that you may do the acts of a man;
then, that you may not be disagreeable to those with whom you associate. You do
something of this kind even in this matter, and you do not perceive it: you
think that you deserve to stink. Let it be so: deserve to stink. Do you think
that also those who sit by you, those who recline at table with you, that those
who kiss you deserve the same? Either go into a desert, where you deserve to
go, or live by yourself, and smell yourself. For it is just that you alone
should enjoy your own impurity. But when you are in a city, to behave so
inconsiderately and foolishly, to what character do you think that it belongs?
If nature had entrusted to you a horse, would you have overlooked and neglected
him? And now think that you have been intrusted with your own body as with a
horse; wash it, wipe it, take care that no man turns away from it, that no one
gets out of the way for it. But who does not get out of the way of a dirty man,
of a stinking man, of a man whose skin is foul, more than he does out of the
way of a man who is daubed with muck? That smell is from without, it is put
upon him; but the other smell is from want of care, from within, and in a
manner from a body in putrefaction.
    "But Socrates washed himself seldom." Yes, but his body was clean and fair:
and it was so agreeable and sweet that tile most beautiful and the most noble
loved him, and desired to sit by him rather than by the side of those who had
the handsomest forms. It was in his power neither to use the bath nor to wash
himself, if he chose; and yet the rare use of water had an effect. If you do
not choose to wash with warm water, wash with cold. But Aristophanes says:
       Those who are pale, unshod, 'tis those I mean.
For Aristophanes says of Socrates that he also walked the air and stole clothes
from the palaestra. But all who have written about Socrates bear exactly the
contrary evidence in his favour; they say that he was pleasant not only to
hear, but also to see. On the other hand they write the same about Diogenes.
For we ought not even by the appearance of the body to deter the multitude from
philosophy; but as in other things, a philosopher should show himself cheerful
and tranquil, so also he should in the things that relate to the body: "See, ye
men, that I have nothing, that I want nothing: see how I am without a house,
and without a city, and an exile, if it happens to be so, and without a hearth
I live more free from trouble and more happily than all of noble birth and than
the rich. But look at my poor body also and observe that it is not injured by
my hard way of living." But if a man says this to me, who has the appearance
and face of a condemned man, what God shall persuade me to approach philosophy,
if it makes men such persons? Far from it; I would not choose to do so, even if
I were going to become a wise man. I indeed would rather that a young man, who
is making his first movements toward philosophy, should come to me with his
hair carefully trimmed than with it dirty and rough, for there is seen in him a
certain notion of beauty and a desire of that which is becoming; and where he
supposes it to be, there also he strives that it shall be. It is only necessary
to show him, and to say: "Young man, you seek beauty, and you do well: you must
know then that it grows in that part of you where you have the rational
faculty: seek it there where you have the movements toward and the movements
from things, where you have the desire toward, ind the aversion from things:
for this is what you have in yourself of a superior kind; but the poor body is
naturally only earth: why do you labour about it to no purpose? if you shall
learn nothing else, you will learn from time that the body is nothing." But if
a man comes to me daubed with filth, dirty, with a mustache down to his knees,
what can I say to him, by what kind of resemblance can I lead him on? For about
what has he busied himself which resembles beauty, that I may be able to change
him and "Beauty is not in this, but in that?" Would you have me to tell him,
that beauty consists not in being daubed with muck, but that it lies in the
rational part? Has he any desire of beauty? has he any form of it in his mind?
Go and talk to a hog, and tell him not to roll in the mud.
    For this reason the words of Xenocrates touched Polemon also; since he was
a lover of beauty, for he entered, having in him certain incitements to love of
beauty, but he looked for it in the wrong place. For nature has not made even
the animals dirty which live with man. Does a horse ever wallow in the mud or a
well-bred dog? But the hog, and the dirty geese, and worms and spiders do,
which are banished furthest from human intercourse. Do you, then, being a man,
choose to be not as one of the animals which live with man, but rather a worm,
or a spider? Will you not wash yourself somewhere some time in such manner as
you choose? Will you not wash off the dirt from your body? Will you not come
clean that those with whom you keep company may have pleasure in being with
you? But do you go with us even into the temples in such a state, where it is
not permitted to spit or blow the nose, being a heap of spittle and of snot?
    When then? does any man require you to ornament yourself? Far from it;
except to ornament that which we really are by nature, the rational faculty,
the opinions, the actions; but as to the body only so far as purity, only so
far as not to give offense. But if you are told that you ought not to wear
garments dyed with purple, go and daub your cloak with muck or tear it. "But
how shall I have a neat cloak?" Man, you have water; wash it. Here is a youth
worthy of being loved, here is an old man worthy of loving and being loved in
return, a fit person for a man to intrust to him a son's instruction, to whom
daughters and young men shall come, if opportunity shall so happen, that the
teacher shall deliver his lessons to them on a dunghill. Let this not be so:
every deviation comes from something which is in man's nature; but this is near
being something not in man's nature.

On attention

    When you have remitted your attention for a short time, do not imagine
this, that you will recover it when you choose; but let but let this thought be
present to you, that in consequence of the fault committed to-day your affairs
must be in a worse condition for all that follows. For first, and what causes
most trouble, a habit of not attending is formed in you; then a habit of
deferring your attention. And continually from time to time you drive away, by
deferring it, the happiness of life, proper behavior, the being and living
conformably to nature. If, then, the procrastination of attention is
profitable, the complete omission of attention is more profitable; but if it is
not profitable, why do you not maintain your attention constant? "To-day I
choose to play." Well then, ought you not to play with attention? "I choose to
sing." What, then, hinders you from doing so with attention? Is there any part
of life excepted, to which attention does not extend? For will you do it worse
by using attention, and better by not attending at all? And what else of things
in life is done better by those who do not use attention? Does he who works in
wood work better by not attending to it? Does the captain of a ship manage it
better by not attending? and is any of the smaller acts done better by
inattention? Do you not see that, when you have let your mind loose, it is no
longer in your power to recall it, either to propriety, or to modesty, or to
moderation: but you do everything that comes into your mind in obedience to
your inclinations?
    To what things then ought I to attend? First to those general (principles)
and to have them in readiness, and without them not to sleep, not to rise, not
to drink, not to eat, not to converse with men; that no man is master of
another man's will, but that in the will alone is the good and the bad. No man,
then, has the power either to procure for me any good or to involve me in any
evil, but I alone myself over myself have power in these things. When, then,
these things are secured to me, why need I be disturbed about external things?
What tyrant is formidable, what disease, what poverty, what offense? "Well, I
have not pleased a certain person." Is he then my work, my judgement? "No." Why
then should I trouble myself about him? "But he is supposed to be some one." He
will look to that himself; and those who think so will also. But I have One
Whom I ought to please, to Whom I ought to subject myself, Whom I ought to
obey, God and those who are next to Him. He has placed me with myself, and has
put my will in obedience to myself alone, and has given me rules for the right
use of it; and when I follow these rules in syllogisms, I do not care for any
man who says anything else: in sophistical argument, I care for no man. Why
then in greater matters do those annoy me who blame me? What is the cause of
this perturbation? Nothing else than because in this matter I am not
disciplined. For all knowledge despises ignorance and the ignorant; and not
only the sciences, but even the arts. Produce any shoemaker that you please,
and he ridicules the many in respect to his own work. Produce any carpenter.
    First, then, we ought to have these in readiness, and to do nothing without
them, and we ought to keep the soul directed to this mark, to pursue nothing
external, and nothing which belongs to others, but to do as He has appointed
Who has the power; we ought to pursue altogether the things which are in the
power of the will, and all other things as it is permitted. Next to this we
ought to remember who we are, and what is our name, and to endeavour to direct
our duties toward the character of our several relations in this manner: what
is the season for singing, what is the season for play, and in whose presence;
what will be the consequence of the act; whether our associates will despise
us, whether we shall despise them; when to jeer, and whom to ridicule; and on
what occasion to comply and with whom; and finally, in complying how to
maintain our own character. But wherever you have deviated from any of these
rules, there is damage immediately, not from anything external, but from the
action itself.
    What then? is it possible to be free from faults? It is not possible; but
tills is possible, to direct your efforts incessantly to being faultless. For
we must be content if by never remitting this attention we shall escape at
least a few errors. But now when you have said, "To-morrow I will begin to
attend," you must be told that you are saying this, "To-day I will be
shameless, disregardful of time and place, mean; it will be in the power of
others to give me pain; to-day I will be passionate and envious." See how many
evil things you are permitting yourself to do. If it is good to use attention
to-morrow, how much better is it to do so to-day? if to-morrow it is in your
interest to attend, much more is it to-day, that you may be able to do so
to-morrow also, and may not defer it again to the third day.

Against or to those who readily tell their own affairs

    When a man has seemed to us to have talked with simplicity about his own
affairs, how is it that at last we are ourselves also induced to discover to
him our own secrets and we think this to be candid behavior? In the first
place, because it seems unfair for a man to have listened to the affairs of his
neighbour, and not to communicate to him also in turn our own affairs: next,
because we think that we shall not present to them the appearance of candid men
when we are silent about our own affairs. Indeed men are often accustomed to
say, "I have told you all my affairs, will you tell me nothing of your own?
where is this done?" Besides, we have also this opinion that we can safely
trust him who has already told us his own affairs; for the notion rises in our
mind that this man could never divulge our affairs because he would be cautious
that we also should not divulge his. In this way also the incautious are caught
by the soldiers at Rome. A soldier sits by you in a common dress and begins to
speak ill of Caesar; then you, as if you had received a pledge of his fidelity
by his having begun the abuse, utter yourself also what you think, and then you
are carried off in chains.
    Something of this kind happens to us generally. Now as this man has
confidently intrusted his affairs to me, shall I also do so to any man whom I
meet? For when I have heard, I keep silence, if I am of such a disposition; but
he goes forth and tells all men what he has heard. Then if I hear what has been
done, if I be a man like him, I resolve to be revenged, I divulge what he has
told me; I both disturb others and am disturbed myself. But if I remember that
one man does not injure another, and that every man's acts injure and profit
him, I secure this, that I do not anything like him, but still I suffer what I
do suffer through my own silly talk.
    "True: but it is unfair when you have heard the secrets of your neighbour
for you in turn to communicate nothing to him." Did I ask you for your secrets,
my man? did you communicate your affairs on certain terms, that you should in
return hear mine also? If you are a babbler and think that all who meet you are
friends, do you wish me also to be like you? But why, if you did well in
entrusting your affairs to me, and it is not well for me to intrust mine to
you, do you wish me to be so rash? It is just the same as if I had a cask which
is water-tight, and you one with a hole in it, and you should come and deposit
with me your wine that I might put it into my cask, and then should complain
that I also did not intrust my wine to you, for you have a cask with a hole in
it. How then is there any equality here? You intrusted your affairs to a man
who is faithful and modest, to a man who thinks that his own actions alone are
injurious and useful, and that nothing external is. Would you have me intrust
mine to you, a man who has dishonoured his own faculty of will, and who wishes
to gain some small bit of money or some office or promotion in the court, even
if you should be going to murder your own children, like Medea? Where is this
equality? But show yourself to me to be faithful, modest, and steady: show me
that you have friendly opinions; show that your cask has no hole in it; and you
will see how I shall not wait for you to trust me with your affairs, but I
myself shall come to you and ask you to hear mine. For who does not choose to
make use of a good vessel? Who does not value a benevolent and faithful
adviser? who will not willingly receive a man who is ready to bear a share, as
we may say, of the difficulty of his circumstances, and by this very act to
ease the burden, by taking a part of it.
    "True: but I trust you; you do not trust me." In the first place, not even
do you trust me, but you are a babbler, and for this reason you cannot hold
anything; for indeed, if it is true that you trust me, trust your affairs to me
only; but now, whenever you see a man at leisure, you seat yourself by him and
say: "Brother, I have no friend more benevolent than you nor dearer; I request
you to listen to my affairs." And you do this even to those who are not known
to you at all. But if you really trust me, it is plain that you trust me
because I am faithful and modest, not because I have told my affairs to you.
Allow me, then, to have the same opinion about you. Show me that, if one man
tells his affairs to another, he who tells them is faithful and modest. For if
this were so, I would go about and tell my affairs to every man, if that would
make me faithful and modest. But the thing is not so, and it requires no common
opinions. If, then, you see a man who is busy about things not dependent on his
will and subjecting his will to them, you must know that this man has ten
thousand persons to compel and hinder him. He has no need of pitch or the wheel
to compel him to declare what he knows: but a little girl's nod, if it should
so happen, will move him, the blandishment of one who belongs to Caesar's
court, desire of a magistracy or of an inheritance, and things without end of
that sort. You must remember, then, among general principles that secret
discourses require fidelity and corresponding opinions. But where can we now
find these easily? Or if you cannot answer that question, let some one point
out to me a man who can say: "I care only about the things which are my own,
the things which are not subject to hindrance, the things which are by nature
free." This I hold to be the nature of the good: but let all other things be as
they are allowed; I do not concern myself.
